
1. Int J Nanomedicine. 2019 May 10;14:3439-3454. doi: 10.2147/IJN.S201626.
eCollection 2019.

Fabrication and characterization of a titanium dioxide (TiO2) nanoparticles
reinforced bio-nanocomposite containing Miswak (Salvadora persica L.) extract -
the antimicrobial, thermo-physical and barrier properties.

Ahmadi R(1), Tanomand A(2), Kazeminava F(1), Kamounah FS(3), Ayaseh A(4),
Ganbarov K(5), Yousefi M(6), Katourani A(1), Yousefi B(7), Kafil HS(1).

Author information: 
(1)Drug Applied Research Center, Tabriz University of Medical Sciences, Tabriz,
Iran.
(2)Department of Basic Sciences, Maragheh University of Medical Sciences,
Maragheh, Iran.
(3)Department of Chemistry, University of Copenhagen, DK- 2100 Copenhagen.
Denmark.
(4)Department of Food Science and Technology, University of Tabriz, Tabriz, Iran.
(5)Department of Microbiology, Baku State University, Baku, Azerbaijan.
(6)Stem Cell Research Center, Tabriz University of Medical Sciences, Tabriz,
Iran.
(7)Immunology Research Center, Tabriz University of Medical Sciences, Tabriz,
Iran.

Objective: The microbial, physico-chemical and optical corruptions threaten a
variety of foods and drugs and consequently the human biological safety and its
accessible resources. The humanbeing's tendency towards bio-based materials and
natural plant-extracts led to an increase in the usage of antimicrobial
biocomposites based on medicinal herbs. Miswak (Salvadora persica L.) extract
(SPE) has been proved effective for its antimicrobial and other biological
activities. Therefore, in this study, titanium dioxide (TiO2) nanoparticles
(TONP) and SPE were applied to fabricate antimicrobial carboxymethyl cellulose
(Na-CMC) based bio-nanocomposites which would simultaneously promote some
thermo-physical and barrier properties. Methods: CMC-neat film (C1), CMC/TONP-2% 
(C2) and CMC/TONP-2% with 150, 300 and 450 mg/mL SPE (SPE150, SPE30 and SPE450,
respectively) were fabricated. The physical and mechanical properties; elemental 
mapping analysis (MAP), X-ray diffraction (XRD), scanning electron microscopy
(SEM), thermal gravimetric analysis (TGA-DTG); fourier transform infrared (FTIR),
energy-dispersive X-ray (EDX) and UV-vis spectroscopies were done to further
validate the results. Results: Addition of TONP (2%) improved the blocking of UV 
light at 280 nm while SPE-containing nanocomposites completely blocked it. FTIR, 
XRD and SEM confirmed the formation of homogeneous films and high miscibility of 
applied materials. TONP led to an increase in Young's modulus (YM) and stress at 
break (SB) while SPE decreased them and enhanced the elongation to break (EB)
(flexibility) of the active nanocomposites. Compared to CMC-film, the
thermo-gravimetric analysis (TGA-DTG) showed a higher thermal stability for
CMC/TONP and CMC/TONP/SPE nanocomposites. The EDX spectroscopy and elemental
mapping analysis (MAP) proved the existence and well-distributedness of Na, K,
Cl, S, Ti, F and N elements in SPE-activated nanocomposites. The pure SPE and
SPE-activated nanocomposites showed a favorable antimicrobial activity against
both gram-positive (Staphylococcus aureus) and negative (Escherichia coli)
bacteria. Conclusion: The CMC-TiO2-SPE nanocomposites were homogeneously
produced. Combination of TiO2 nanoparticles and dose-dependent SPE led to an
improvement of thermal stability, and high potential in antimicrobial and
UV-barrier properties. These results can generally highlight the role of the
fabricated antimicrobial bio-nanocomposites as a based for different applications
especially in food/drug packaging or coating.

DOI: 10.2147/IJN.S201626 
PMCID: PMC6522844
PMID: 31190802  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors report no conflicts of interest in
this work.

