
1. BMC Complement Altern Med. 2019 Jun 21;19(1):145. doi: 10.1186/s12906-019-2533-5.

Antimicrobial activity of red wine and oenological extracts against periodontal
pathogens in a validated oral biofilm model.

Sánchez MC(1), Ribeiro-Vidal H(1), Esteban-Fernández A(2), Bartolomé B(2),
Figuero E(1), Moreno-Arribas MV(2), Sanz M(1), Herrera D(3)(4).

Author information: 
(1)ETEP (Etiology and Therapy of Periodontal Diseases) Research Group, University
Complutense, Madrid, Spain.
(2)Instituto de Investigación en Ciencias de la Alimentación (CIAL), CSIC-UAM,
Madrid, Spain.
(3)ETEP (Etiology and Therapy of Periodontal Diseases) Research Group, University
Complutense, Madrid, Spain. davidher@ucm.es.
(4)Department of Dental Clinical Specialities (DDCS), Faculty of Odontology,
Plaza Ramón y Cajal s/n Ciudad Universitaria, 28040, Madrid, Spain.
davidher@ucm.es.

BACKGROUND: Previous research findings support an antimicrobial effect of
polyphenols against a variety of pathogens, but there is no evidence of this
effect against periodontal pathogens in complex biofilms. The purpose of this
study was to evaluate the antimicrobial activity of red wine and oenological
extracts, rich in polyphenols, against the periodontal pathogens Porphyromonas
gingivalis, Aggregatibacter actinomycetemcomitans and Fusobacterium nucleatum and
total bacteria growing in an in vitro oral biofilm static model.
METHODS: A previously validated biofilm model, including Streptococcus oralis,
Actinomyces naeslundii, Veillonella parvula, F. nucleatum, P. gingivalis and A.
actinomycetemcomitans was developed on sterile hydroxyapatite discs. Red wine
(and dealcoholized wine), and two polyphenols-rich extracts (from wine and grape 
seeds) were applied to 72 h biofilms by dipping the discs during 1 and 5 min in
the wine solutions and during 30 s and 1 min in the oenological extracts.
Resulting biofilms were analyzed by confocal laser scanning microscopy and viable
bacteria (colony forming units/mL) were measured by quantitative polymerase chain
reaction combined with propidium monoazide. A generalized linear model was
constructed to determine the effect of the tested products on the viable
bacterial counts of A. actinomycetemcomitans, P. gingivalis and F. nucleatum, as 
well on the total number of viable bacteria.
RESULTS: The results showed that red wine and dealcoholized red wine caused
reduction in viability of total bacteria within the biofilm, with statistically
significant reductions in the number of viable P. gingivalis after 1 min
(p = 0.008) and in A. actinomycetemcomitans after 5 min of exposure (p = 0.011)
with red wine. No evidence of relevant antibacterial effect was observed with the
oenological extracts, with statistically significant reductions of F. nucleatum
after 30 s of exposure to both oenological extracts (p = 0.001).
CONCLUSIONS: Although moderate, the antimicrobial impact observed in the total
bacterial counts and counts of A. actinomycetemcomitans, P. gingivalis and F.
nucleatum, encourage further investigations on the potential use of these natural
products in the prevention and treatment of periodontal diseases.

DOI: 10.1186/s12906-019-2533-5 
PMCID: PMC6588849
PMID: 31226983  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

