
1. Sci Rep. 2019 Jun 24;9(1):9117. doi: 10.1038/s41598-019-45499-z.

The contribution of gut bacteria to insecticide resistance and the life histories
of the major malaria vector Anopheles arabiensis (Diptera: Culicidae).

Barnard K(1), Jeanrenaud ACSN(2)(3), Brooke BD(2)(3), Oliver SV(4)(5).

Author information: 
(1)School of Molecular and Cell Biology, Faculty of Science, University of the
Witwatersrand, Johannesburg, South Africa.
(2)Centre for Emerging Zoonotic and Parasitic Diseases, National Institute for
Communicable Diseases of the National Health Laboratory Service, Johannesburg,
South Africa.
(3)Wits Research Institute for Malaria, MRC Collaborating Centre for
Multi-disciplinary Research on Malaria,School of Pathology, Faculty of Health
Sciences, University of the Witwatersrand, Johannesburg, South Africa.
(4)Centre for Emerging Zoonotic and Parasitic Diseases, National Institute for
Communicable Diseases of the National Health Laboratory Service, Johannesburg,
South Africa. shuneo@nicd.ac.za.
(5)Wits Research Institute for Malaria, MRC Collaborating Centre for
Multi-disciplinary Research on Malaria,School of Pathology, Faculty of Health
Sciences, University of the Witwatersrand, Johannesburg, South Africa.
shuneo@nicd.ac.za.

The gut microbiota of mosquitoes is a crucial determinant of their fitness. As
such, the biology of the gut microbiota of Anopheles arabiensis, a major malaria 
vector of Southern Africa, was investigated. Two laboratory strains of An.
arabiensis were used; SENN, an insecticide susceptible strain, and SENN-DDT, a
resistant strain. The strains were supplemented with either non-commensal
bacteria or antibiotics via a sucrose source to sterilize the gut. The strains
were fed the broad-spectrum bactericidal antibiotic gentamicin, or a
preferentially gram-positive bactericidal (vancomycin), gram-negative
bactericidal (streptomycin) or broad-spectrum bacteriostatic (erythromycin),
either by sugar supplementation or by artificially-spiked blood-meal. The effects
on adult mosquito longevity and insecticide resistance phenotype were assessed.
Bacteria from the midgut of both strains were characterised by MALDI-TOF mass
spectroscopy. Bactericidal antibiotics increased longevity in SENN-DDT. Bacterial
supplementation increased insecticide tolerance. Antibiotic supplementation via
sugar decreased tolerance to the insecticides deltamethrin and malathion.
Blood-supplemented vancomycin decreased insecticide resistance, while gentamicin 
and streptomycin increased resistance. SENN showed a greater gut bacterial
diversity than SENN-DDT, with both strains dominated by Gram-negative bacteria.
This study suggests a crucial role for bacteria in An. arabiensis life history,
and that gut microflora play variable roles in insecticide resistant and
susceptible mosquitoes.

DOI: 10.1038/s41598-019-45499-z 
PMCID: PMC6591418
PMID: 31235803  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

