
1. World J Gastroenterol. 2019 Jun 21;25(23):2947-2960. doi:
10.3748/wjg.v25.i23.2947.

Expression of genes that control core fucosylation in hepatocellular carcinoma:
Systematic review.

Norton PA(1), Mehta AS(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, Drexel University College of
Medicine, Philadelphia, PA 19102, United States. pan29@drexel.edu.
(2)Department of Cell and Molecular Pharmacology, Medical University of South
Carolina, Charleston, SC 29425, United States.

BACKGROUND: Changes in N-linked glycosylation have been observed in the
circulation of individuals with hepatocellular carcinoma. In particular, an
elevation in the level of core fucosylation has been observed. However, the
mechanisms through which core fucose is increased are not well understood. We
hypothesized that a review of the literature and related bioinformatic review
regarding six genes known to be involved in the attachment of core fucosylation, 
the synthesis of the fucosylation substrate guanosine diphosphate (GDP)-fucose,
or the transport of the substrate into the Golgi might offer mechanistic insight 
into the regulation of core fucose levels.
AIM: To survey the literature to capture the involvement of genes regulating core
N-linked fucosylation in hepatocellular carcinoma.
METHODS: The PubMed biomedical literature database was searched for the
association of hepatocellular carcinoma and each of the core fucose-related genes
and their protein products. We also queried The Cancer Genome Atlas Liver
hepatocellular carcinoma (LIHC) dataset for genetic, epigenetic and gene
expression changes for the set of six genes using the tools at cBioportal.
RESULTS: A total of 27 citations involving one or more of the core
fucosylation-related genes (FPGT, FUK, FUT8, GMDS, SLC35C1, TSTA3) and
hepatocellular carcinoma were identified. The same set of gene symbols was used
to query the 371 patients with liver cancer in the LIHC dataset to identify the
frequency of mRNA over or under expression, as well as non-synonymous mutations, 
copy number variation and methylation level. Although all six genes trended to
more samples displaying over expression relative to under-expression, it was
noted that a number of tumor samples had undergone amplification of the genes of 
the de novo synthesis pathway, GMDS (27 samples) and TSTA3 (78 samples). In
contrast, the other four genes had undergone amplification in 2 or fewer samples.
CONCLUSION: Amplification of genes involved in the de novo pathway for generation
of GDP-fucose, GMDS and TSTA3, likely contributes to the elevated core fucose
observed in hepatocellular carcinoma.

DOI: 10.3748/wjg.v25.i23.2947 
PMCID: PMC6589740
PMID: 31249452  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Conflict-of-interest statement: The authors
declare no conflicts.

