
1. Eur J Histochem. 2019 Jun 26;63(2). doi: 10.4081/ejh.2019.3044.

Optimization of the autophagy measurement in a human cell line and primary cells 
by flow cytometry.

Alonzi T(1), Petruccioli E, Vanini V, Fimia GM, Goletti D.

Author information: 
(1)Translational Research Unit, Department of Epidemiology and Preclinical
Research, National Institute for Infectious Diseases Lazzaro Spallanzani-IRCCS,
Rome. tonino.alonzi@inmi.it.

The limited availability of rapid and reliable flow cytometry-based assays for ex
vivo quantification of autophagy has hampered their clinical applications for
studies of diseases pathogenesis or for the implementation of autophagy-targeting
therapies. To this aim, we modified and improved the protocol of a commercial kit
developed for quantifying the microtubule-associated protein 1A/1B light chain 3B
(LC3), the most reliable marker for autophagosomes currently available. The
protocol modifications were set up measuring the autophagic flux in neoplastic
(THP-1 cells) and primary cells (peripheral blood mononuclear cells; PBMC) of
healthy donors. Moreover, PBMC of active tuberculosis (TB) patients were
stimulated with the Mycobacterium tuberculosis purified protein derivatives or
infected with live Mycobacterium bovis bacillus Calmette-Guerin (BCG). We found
that the baseline median fluorescent intensity (MFI) of THP-1 cells changed
depending on the time of sample acquisition to the flow cytometer. To solve this 
problem, a fixation step was introduced in different stages of the assay's
protocol, obtaining more reproducible and sensitive results when a post-LC3
staining fixation was performed, in either THP1 or PBMC. Furthermore, since we
found that results are influenced by the type and the dose of the lysosome
inhibitor used, the best dose of Chloroquine for LC3 accumulation were set up in 
either THP-1 cells or PBMC. Finally, applying these experimental settings, we
measured the autophagic flux in CD14+ cells from active TB patients' PBMC upon
BCG infection. In conclusion, our data indicate that the protocol modifications
here described in this work improve the stability and accuracy of a flow
cytometry-based assay for the evaluation of autophagy, thus assuring more
standardised cell analyses.

DOI: 10.4081/ejh.2019.3044 
PMCID: PMC6610717
PMID: 31243942  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

