
1. BMC Genomics. 2019 Jul 4;20(1):543. doi: 10.1186/s12864-019-5938-0.

The haustorial transcriptome of the cucurbit pathogen Podosphaera xanthii reveals
new insights into the biotrophy and pathogenesis of powdery mildew fungi.

Polonio Á(1)(2), Seoane P(3), Claros MG(3), Pérez-García A(4)(5).

Author information: 
(1)Departamento de Microbiología, Facultad de Ciencias, Universidad de Málaga,
Bulevar Louis Pasteur 31, 29071, Málaga, Spain.
(2)Instituto de Hortofruticultura Subtropical y Mediterránea "La Mayora",
Universidad de Málaga, Consejo Superior de Investigaciones Científicas
(IHSM-UMA-CSIC), Bulevar Louis Pasteur 31, 29071, Málaga, Spain.
(3)Departamento de Biología Molecular y Bioquímica, Facultad de Ciencias,
Universidad de Málaga, Bulevar Louis Pasteur 31, 29071, Málaga, Spain.
(4)Departamento de Microbiología, Facultad de Ciencias, Universidad de Málaga,
Bulevar Louis Pasteur 31, 29071, Málaga, Spain. aperez@uma.es.
(5)Instituto de Hortofruticultura Subtropical y Mediterránea "La Mayora",
Universidad de Málaga, Consejo Superior de Investigaciones Científicas
(IHSM-UMA-CSIC), Bulevar Louis Pasteur 31, 29071, Málaga, Spain. aperez@uma.es.

BACKGROUND: Podosphaera xanthii is the main causal agent of powdery mildew
disease in cucurbits and is responsible for important yield losses in these crops
worldwide. Powdery mildew fungi are obligate biotrophs. In these parasites,
biotrophy is determined by the presence of haustoria, which are specialized
structures of parasitism developed by these fungi for the acquisition of
nutrients and the delivery of effectors. Detailed molecular studies of powdery
mildew haustoria are scarce due mainly to difficulties in their isolation.
Therefore, their analysis is considered an important challenge for powdery mildew
research. The aim of this work was to gain insights into powdery mildew biology
by analysing the haustorial transcriptome of P. xanthii.
RESULTS: Prior to RNA isolation and massive-scale mRNA sequencing, a flow
cytometric approach was developed to isolate P. xanthii haustoria free of visible
contaminants. Next, several commercial kits were used to isolate total RNA and to
construct the cDNA and Illumina libraries that were finally sequenced by the
Illumina NextSeq system. Using this approach, the maximum amount of information
from low-quality RNA that could be obtained was used to accomplish the de novo
assembly of the P. xanthii haustorial transcriptome. The subsequent analysis of
this transcriptome and comparison with the epiphytic transcriptome allowed us to 
identify the importance of several biological processes for haustorial cells such
as protection against reactive oxygen species, the acquisition of different
nutrients and genetic regulation mediated by non-coding RNAs. In addition, we
could also identify several secreted proteins expressed exclusively in haustoria 
such as cell adhesion proteins that have not been related to powdery mildew
biology to date.
CONCLUSIONS: This work provides a novel approach to study the molecular aspects
of powdery mildew haustoria. In addition, the results of this study have also
allowed us to identify certain previously unknown processes and proteins involved
in the biology of powdery mildews that could be essential for their biotrophy and
pathogenesis.

DOI: 10.1186/s12864-019-5938-0 
PMCID: PMC6611051
PMID: 31272366  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

