
1. J Cell Physiol. 2020 Feb;235(2):1637-1648. doi: 10.1002/jcp.29082. Epub 2019 Jul 
8.

Hepatocyte growth factor enhances the clearance of a multidrug-resistant
Mycobacterium tuberculosis strain by high doses of conventional chemotherapy,
preserving liver function.

Bello-Monroy O(1)(2), Mata-Espinosa D(3), Enríquez-Cortina C(1)(2), Souza
V(2)(4), Miranda RU(2)(4), Bucio L(2)(4), Barrios-Payán J(3), Marquina-Castillo
B(3), Rodríguez-Ochoa I(2), Rosales P(1), Gutiérrez-Ruiz MC(2)(4),
Hernández-Pando R(3), Gomez-Quiroz LE(2)(4).

Author information: 
(1)Posgrado en Biología Experimental, DCBS, Universidad Autónoma Metropolitana
Iztapalapa, Mexico City, Mexico.
(2)Laboratorio de Fisiología Celular, Departamento de Ciencias de la Salud,
Universidad Autónoma Metropolitana Iztapalapa, Mexico City, Mexico.
(3)Departamento de Patología Experimental, Instituto Nacional de Ciencias Médicas
y Nutrición Salvador Zubirán (INCMNSZ), Mexico City, Mexico.
(4)Laboratorio de Medicina Experimental, Unidad de Medicina Translacional,
Instituto de Investigaciones Biomédicas, UNAM/Instituto Nacional de Cardiología
Ignacio Chavez, Mexico City, Mexico.

Tuberculosis (TB) is one of the deadliest infectious diseases in humankind
history. Although, drug sensible TB is slowly decreasing, at present the rise of 
TB cases produced by multidrug-resistant (MDR) and extensively drug-resistant
strains is a big challenge. Thus, looking for new therapeutic options against
these MDR strains is mandatory. In the present work, we studied, in BALB/c mice
infected with MDR strain, the therapeutic effect of supra-pharmacological doses
of the conventional primary antibiotics rifampicin and isoniazid (administrated
by gavage or intratracheal routes), in combination with recombinant human
hepatocyte growth factor (HGF). This high dose of antibiotics administered for 3 
months, overcome the resistant threshold of the MDR strain producing a
significant reduction of pulmonary bacillary loads but induced liver damage,
which was totally prevented by the administration of HGF. To address the
long-term efficiency of this combined treatment, groups of animals after 1 month 
of treatment termination were immunosuppressed by glucocorticoid administration
and, after 1 month, mice were euthanized, and the bacillary load was determined
in lungs. In comparison with animals treated only with a high dose of
antibiotics, animals that received the combined treatment showed significantly
lower bacterial burdens. Thus, treatment of MDR-TB with very high doses of
primary antibiotics particularly administrated by aerial route can produce a very
good therapeutic effect, and its hepatic toxicity can be prevented by the
administration of HGF, becoming in a new treatment modality for MDR-TB.

© 2019 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

DOI: 10.1002/jcp.29082 
PMID: 31283037  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

