
1. PLoS One. 2019 Jul 11;14(7):e0219616. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0219616.
eCollection 2019.

Phyllosilicates as protective habitats of filamentous cyanobacteria Leptolyngbya 
against ultraviolet radiation.

Kugler A(1), Dong H(1)(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Geology and Environmental Earth Sciences, Miami University,
Oxford, OH, United States of America.
(2)State Key Laboratory of Biogeology and Environmental Geology, China University
of Geosciences, Beijing, China.

Phototrophic cyanobacteria are limited in growth locations by their need for
visible light and must also cope with intermittent ultraviolet radiation (UVR),
especially in extreme environments such as deserts and on early Earth. One
survival method for cyanobacteria is growing endolithically within minerals such 
as micas, gypsum, and quartz minerals. However, the capability of different mica 
minerals to protect cyanobacteria from UVR, while at the same time allowing
transmission of photosynthetically active radiation (PAR), has only been
minimally examined. In this study, we performed laboratory incubation experiments
to demonstrate that a model filamentous cyanobacterium, Leptolyngbya sp., can
colonize micas, such as muscovite, phlogopite, and biotite. After inoculation
experiments confirmed that these cyanobacteria grew between the sheets of mica,
Leptolyngbya sp. colonies were exposed to UVB and UVC for up to 24 hrs, and the
level of survival was determined using chlorophyll a and carotenoid assays. Of
the three micas investigated, muscovite, being an Fe-poor and Al-rich mica,
provided the least attenuation of UVR, however it transmitted the most visible
light. Fe-rich biotite provided the best UVR shielding. Phlogopite, apparently
because of its intermediate amount of Fe, showed the greatest ability to shield
UVR while still transmitting an adequate amount of visible light, making it the
ideal habitat for the cyanobacterium. Upon exposure to UVR, significant shifts in
several important fatty acids of the cyanobacterium were detected such as
linolenic acid and oleic acid, 18:3ω3 and 18:1ω9c, respectively. These cellular
changes are interpreted to be a consequence of UVR and other accessory stress
(such as O3).

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0219616 
PMCID: PMC6623962
PMID: 31295311  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have declared that no competing
interests exist.

