
1. Clin Immunol. 2019 Oct;207:49-54. doi: 10.1016/j.clim.2019.07.009. Epub 2019 Jul 
17.

Engineered ovalbumin-expressing regulatory T cells protect against anaphylaxis in
ovalbumin-sensitized mice.

Abdeladhim M(1), Zhang AH(1), Kropp LE(2), Lindrose AR(2), Venkatesha SH(1),
Mitre E(2), Scott DW(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, Uniformed Services University, Bethesda, MD 20814,
United States of America.
(2)Department of Microbiology & Immunology, Uniformed Services University,
Bethesda, MD 20814, United States of America.
(3)Department of Medicine, Uniformed Services University, Bethesda, MD 20814,
United States of America. Electronic address: David.scott@usuhs.edu.

Allergy is a major public health concern, the main treatment for which is
symptomatic relief with anti-inflammatory drugs. A key clinical challenge is to
induce specific tolerance in order to control allergen-specific memory B and T
cells, and specifically block effector cell responses. Our lab recently developed
antigen-specific regulatory T-cell (Treg) therapies as a treatment for adverse
responses. Recently, we created a chimeric antigen receptor (CAR) approach in
which we engineered a target protein antigen, ovalbumin (OVA), linked with the
transmembrane and signal transduction domains, CD28-CD3ζ to directly target B
cells and sensitized mast cells in an allergy model. We named this receptor "BAR"
for B-cell Antibody Receptor. Murine or human Tregs, transduced with a BAR
containing OVA or control Tregs expressing an unrelated antigen, were
successfully expanded in vitro and tested in the murine OVA-alum allergy model
with measurable titers of anti-OVA IgE. Because BAR Tregs express the target
antigen and could interact with specific IgE on sensitized mast cells, we first
demonstrated that intravenously injected OVA-BAR Tregs did not directly lead to a
drop in temperature or release of mediators in plasma indicative of anaphylaxis. 
Forty-eight hours later, mice were challenged intraperitoneally with 200 μg OVA
to induce an anaphylactic reaction, and temperature immediately measured for
30 min. We found that OVA-BAR Tregs protected mice from hypothermia, whereas mice
given control BARs (expressing an unrelated antigen) or PBS showed substantial
temperature drops indicative of anaphylaxis when systemically challenged with
OVA. Importantly, this effect was also demonstrated in a passive anaphylaxis
model in which mice that received anti-OVA IgE antibody were protected from
hypothermia when treated with OVA-BAR Tregs prior to systemic OVA challenge.
These results provide proof of principle that engineered allergen-specific
T-regulatory cells can provide clinical protection against severe allergic
reactions in individuals already IgE-sensitized to an allergen.

Published by Elsevier Inc.

DOI: 10.1016/j.clim.2019.07.009 
PMCID: PMC6742773
PMID: 31325629  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

