
1. Iran J Microbiol. 2019 Apr;11(2):151-159.

Fecal human β-defensin-2 (hBD-2) levels and gut microbiota patterns in preterm
neonates with different feeding patterns.

Corebima BIRV(1), Rohsiswatmo R(2), Gayatri P(3), Patole S(4).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neonatology, Child Health Division, Faculty of Medicine
Brawijaya University, Dr. Saiful Anwar General Hospital, Malang, Indonesia.
(2)Department of Neonatology, Child Health Division, Faculty of Medicine
University of Indonesia, Dr. Cipto Mangunkusumo General Hospital, Jakarta,
Indonesia.
(3)Department of Gastrohepatology, Child Health Division, Faculty of Medicine
University of Indonesia, Dr. Cipto Mangunkusumo General Hospital, Jakarta,
Indonesia.
(4)Department of Neonatal Paediatrics, King Edward Memorial Hospital for Women,
Perth, Australia.

Background and Objectives: Human β-defensin-2 (hBD-2) is an essential
antibacterial peptide involved in innate immunity and is expressed in breast milk
and intestinal mucosa. The aim of this study was to investigate fecal hBD-2
levels and gut microbiota in preterm neonates with different feeding patterns.
Materials and Methods: This study was cross-sectionally designed and included 44 
preterm neonates categorized into four groups as follows: breast milk only,
breast milk predominant, formula milk predominant, formula milk only. The study
was conducted at the Neonatology Ward, National Center Hospital Cipto
Mangunkusumo, Jakarta from November 2016 to April 2017. hBD-2 levels were
measured by ELISA. Intestinal bacteria were quantified by qPCR.
Results: hBD-2 levels were significantly different between groups (one-way ANOVA,
p=0.004) and the highest value of hBD-2 was found in the formula milk predominant
group (344.87±61.2 ng/mL). hBD-2 levels were positively correlated with feeding
pattern (Spearman correlation test, p=0.009, r=0.391). There were no significant 
differences in the total number of specific intestinal microbiota
(Bifidobacterium, Lactobacillus and Klebsiella) among groups (one-way ANOVA,
p>0.05). Interestingly, the formula milk only group had the highest amount of
Klebsiella compared with other groups. hBD-2 levels were not correlated with the 
quantity of Bifidobacterium, Lactobacillus and Klebsiella (Pearson correlation
test, p>0.05).
Conclusion: hBD-2 levels were significantly higher in the formula milk
predominant group compared with the breast milk only group. Gut microbiota
patterns showed that Bifidobacterium and Lactobacillus were higher in the breast 
milk only group, while Klebsiella was higher in formula milk group, although this
difference was not statistically significant.


PMCID: PMC6635308
PMID: 31341570 

