
1. J Food Biochem. 2019 Feb;43(2):e12723. doi: 10.1111/jfbc.12723. Epub 2018 Nov 5.

Neem, pawpaw and bamboo leaf meal dietary supplementation in broiler chickens:
Effect on performance and health status.

Oloruntola OD(1), Agbede JO(2), Ayodele SO(3), Oloruntola DA(4).

Author information: 
(1)Animal Science Department, Adekunle Ajasin University, Akungba Akoko, Nigeria.
(2)Animal Production and Health Department, The Federal University of Technology,
Akure, Nigeria.
(3)Animal Production Unit. Agricultural Technology Department, The Federal
Polytechnic, Ado Ekiti, Nigeria.
(4)Microbiology Department, The Federal University of Technology, Akure, Nigeria.

The effect of the diet supplemented with leaf meals (LM) of neem (NLM), pawpaw
(PLM), bamboo (BLM) and their composite leaf mix (CLM) on broiler chickens was
assessed. Three hundred 1-day old broiler chickens were distributed to five
diets: (control/no LM), (5 g/kg NLM), (5 g/kg PLM), (5 g/kg BLM) and (5 g/kg
NLM+PLM+BLM 1:1:1). Body weight gain of birds fed BLM and CLM supplemented diets 
were similar but higher (p < 0.05) than those fed the control, NLM and PLM
supplemented diets at day 42. The glucose, triglycerides, cholesterol, alanine
aminotransferase and creatinine levels in LM supplemented diets were (p < 0.05)
lower compared to the control. The superoxide dismutase, glutathione peroxidase
and catalase were (p < 0.05) higher in LM supplemented diets compared to the
control. The growth promoting potentials of bamboo leaf meal and the composite
leaf mix can be harnessed for broiler chicken production. PRACTICAL APPLICATIONS:
The use of herbs as the growth promoter is currently gaining research attention
in most countries. In particular, herbal supplementation in poultry diets had
been proposed as a means of enhancing the performance, stabilizing the
physiological state, boosting immunity and antioxidative status in the birds.
This study showed that improved body weight gain of broiler chickens at 42 days
of age with attendant low serum glucose, triglycerides and cholesterol can be
achieved when leaf meals from neem, pawpaw, bamboo and their composite mix were
used as phyto-additives. The bamboo leaf meal and the composite leaf meal can be 
used to reduce the occurrence of arteriosclerosis which predisposes sudden death 
syndrome in well-grown and healthy broiler chickens. The procedures of raising
broiler chickens to reach about 3 kg in less than 2 months impose a heavy burden 
on the heart, particularly overloading on the ventricular arteries leading to
arteriosclerosis with age.

© 2018 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

DOI: 10.1111/jfbc.12723 
PMID: 31353650  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

