
1. Environ Monit Assess. 2019 Aug 3;191(9):539. doi: 10.1007/s10661-019-7647-1.

A multivariate statistical approach to the integration of different land-uses,
seasons, and water quality as water resources management tool.

de Souza Pereira MA(1), Cavalheri PS(2), de Oliveira MÂC(3), Magalhães Filho
FJC(4).

Author information: 
(1)Master Student Program in Environmental Sciences and Agricultural
Sustainability, Dom Bosco Catholic University, Campo Grande, MS, Brazil.
(2)Department of Sanitary and Environmental Engineering, Dom Bosco Catholic
University, Campo Grande, MS, Brazil.
(3)Post-Graduate Program in Local Development and Environmental Sciences and
Agricultural Sustainability, Dom Bosco Catholic University, Campo Grande, MS,
Brazil.
(4)Department of Sanitary and Environmental Engineering and Post-Graduate Program
in Environmental Sciences and Agricultural Sustainability and Local Development, 
Dom Bosco Catholic University, Campo Grande, MS, Brazil. fernando@ucdb.br.

The externalities generated by disorderly urbanization and lack of proper
planning becomes one of the main factors that must be considered in water
resource management. To address the multiple uses of water and avoid conflicts
among users, decision-making must integrate these factors into quality and
quantity aspects. The water quality index (WQI), using the correlation matrix and
the multivariate principal component analysis (PCA) and cluster analysis (CA)
techniques were used to analyze the surface water quality, considering urban,
rural, and industrial regions in an integrated way, even with data gaps. The
results showed that the main parameters that impacted the water quality index
were dissolved oxygen, elevation, and total phosphorus. The results of PCA
analysis showed 86.25% of the variance in the data set, using physicochemical and
topographic parameters. In the cluster analysis, the dissolved oxygen, elevation,
total coliforms, E. coli, total phosphorus, total nitrogen, and temperature
parameters showed a significant correlation between the data's dimensions. In the
industrial region, the characteristic parameter was the organic load, in the
rural region were nutrients (phosphorus and nitrogen), and in the urban region
was E. coli (an indicator of the pathogenic organisms' presence). In the
classification of the samples, there was a predominance of "Good" quality,
however, samples classified as "Acceptable" and "Bad" occurred during the winter 
and spring months (dry season) in the rural and industrial regions. Water
pollution is linked to inadequate land use and occupation and population density 
in certain regions without access to sanitation services.

DOI: 10.1007/s10661-019-7647-1 
PMID: 31377943  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

