
1. J Immunol Res. 2019 Jul 14;2019:2180409. doi: 10.1155/2019/2180409. eCollection
2019.

Immunopathology of Airway Surface Liquid Dehydration Disease.

Lewis BW(1), Patial S(1), Saini Y(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Comparative Biomedical Sciences, School of Veterinary Medicine, 
Louisiana State University, Baton Rouge, LA 70803, USA.

The primary purpose of pulmonary ventilation is to supply oxygen (O2) for
sustained aerobic respiration in multicellular organisms. However, a plethora of 
abiotic insults and airborne pathogens present in the environment are
occasionally introduced into the airspaces during inhalation, which could be
detrimental to the structural integrity and functioning of the respiratory
system. Multiple layers of host defense act in concert to eliminate unwanted
constituents from the airspaces. In particular, the mucociliary escalator
provides an effective mechanism for the continuous removal of inhaled insults
including pathogens. Defects in the functioning of the mucociliary escalator
compromise the mucociliary clearance (MCC) of inhaled pathogens, which favors
microbial lung infection. Defective MCC is often associated with airway
mucoobstruction, increased occurrence of respiratory infections, and progressive 
decrease in lung function in mucoobstructive lung diseases including cystic
fibrosis (CF). In this disease, a mutation in the cystic fibrosis transmembrane
conductance regulator (CFTR) gene results in dehydration of the airway surface
liquid (ASL) layer. Several mice models of Cftr mutation have been developed;
however, none of these models recapitulate human CF-like mucoobstructive lung
disease. As an alternative, the Scnn1b transgenic (Scnn1b-Tg+) mouse model
overexpressing a transgene encoding sodium channel nonvoltage-gated 1, beta
subunit (Scnn1b) in airway club cells is available. The Scnn1b-Tg+ mouse model
exhibits airway surface liquid (ASL) dehydration, impaired MCC, increased mucus
production, and early spontaneous pulmonary bacterial infections. High morbidity 
and mortality among mucoobstructive disease patients, high economic and health
burden, and lack of scientific understanding of the progression of
mucoobstruction warrants in-depth investigation of the cause of mucoobstruction
in mucoobstructive disease models. In this review, we will summarize published
literature on the Scnn1b-Tg+ mouse and analyze various unanswered questions on
the initiation and progression of mucobstruction and bacterial infections.

DOI: 10.1155/2019/2180409 
PMCID: PMC6664684
PMID: 31396541  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that they have no competing
interests.

