
1. Microb Cell Fact. 2019 Aug 13;18(1):134. doi: 10.1186/s12934-019-1178-x.

Fructose metabolism in Chromohalobacter salexigens: interplay between the
Embden-Meyerhof-Parnas and Entner-Doudoroff pathways.

Pastor JM(1), Borges N(2), Pagán JP(3), Castaño-Cerezo S(3), Csonka LN(4),
Goodner BW(5), Reynolds KA(5), Gonçalves LG(2), Argandoña M(6), Nieto JJ(6),
Vargas C(6), Bernal V(7), Cánovas M(8).

Author information: 
(1)Dept. de Bioquímica y Biología Molecular B e Inmunología. Facultad de Química.
Campus Regional de Excelencia Internacional "Campus Mare Nostrum", Universidad de
Murcia, 30100, Murcia, Spain. josempastor@um.es.
(2)Instituto de Tecnologia Química e Biologica, Universidade Nova de Lisboa,
Oeiras, Portugal.
(3)Dept. de Bioquímica y Biología Molecular B e Inmunología. Facultad de Química.
Campus Regional de Excelencia Internacional "Campus Mare Nostrum", Universidad de
Murcia, 30100, Murcia, Spain.
(4)Dept. of Biological Sciences, Purdue University, West Lafayette, IN,
47907-2064, USA.
(5)Dept. of Biology, Hiram College, Hiram, OH, 44234, USA.
(6)Dept. of Microbiology and Parasitology, University of Seville, 41012, Seville,
Spain.
(7)Centro de Tecnología de Repsol, Repsol S.A. Calle Agustín de Betancourt, s/n, 
28935, Móstoles, Spain. vicente.bernal@repsol.com.
(8)Dept. de Bioquímica y Biología Molecular B e Inmunología. Facultad de Química.
Campus Regional de Excelencia Internacional "Campus Mare Nostrum", Universidad de
Murcia, 30100, Murcia, Spain. mcanovas@um.es.

BACKGROUND: The halophilic bacterium Chromohalobacter salexigens metabolizes
glucose exclusively through the Entner-Doudoroff (ED) pathway, an adaptation
which results in inefficient growth, with significant carbon overflow, especially
at low salinity. Preliminary analysis of C. salexigens genome suggests that
fructose metabolism could proceed through the Entner-Doudoroff and
Embden-Meyerhof-Parnas (EMP) pathways. In order to thrive at high salinity, this 
bacterium relies on the biosynthesis and accumulation of ectoines as major
compatible solutes. This metabolic pathway imposes a high metabolic burden due to
the consumption of a relevant proportion of cellular resources, including both
energy molecules (NADPH and ATP) and carbon building blocks. Therefore, the
existence of more than one glycolytic pathway with different stoichiometries may 
be an advantage for C. salexigens. The aim of this work is to experimentally
characterize the metabolism of fructose in C. salexigens.
RESULTS: Fructose metabolism was analyzed using in silico genome analysis,
RT-PCR, isotopic labeling, and genetic approaches. During growth on fructose as
the sole carbon source, carbon overflow was not observed in a wide range of salt 
concentrations, and higher biomass yields were reached. We unveiled the initial
steps of the two pathways for fructose incorporation and their links to central
metabolism. While glucose is metabolized exclusively through the Entner-Doudoroff
(ED) pathway, fructose is also partially metabolized by the
Embden-Meyerhof-Parnas (EMP) route. Tracking isotopic label from [1-13C] fructose
to ectoines revealed that 81% and 19% of the fructose were metabolized through ED
and EMP-like routes, respectively. Activities of enzymes from both routes were
demonstrated in vitro by 31P-NMR. Genes encoding predicted fructokinase and
1-phosphofructokinase were cloned and the activities of their protein products
were confirmed. Importantly, the protein encoded by csal1534 gene functions as
fructose bisphosphatase, although it had been annotated previously as
pyrophosphate-dependent phosphofructokinase. The gluconeogenic rather than
glycolytic role of this enzyme in vivo is in agreement with the lack of
6-phosphofructokinase activity previously described.
CONCLUSIONS: Overall, this study shows that C. salexigens possesses a greater
metabolic flexibility for fructose catabolism, the ED and EMP pathways
contributing to a fine balancing of energy and biosynthetic demands and,
subsequently, to a more efficient metabolism.

DOI: 10.1186/s12934-019-1178-x 
PMCID: PMC6692947
PMID: 31409414  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

