
1. Immunol Rev. 2019 Sep;291(1):91-103. doi: 10.1111/imr.12771.

Inducible T-cell co-stimulator: Signaling mechanisms in T follicular helper cells
and beyond.

Panneton V(1)(2), Chang J(1)(3), Witalis M(1)(3), Li J(1)(4), Suh WK(1)(2)(3)(4).

Author information: 
(1)IRCM (Institut de recherches cliniques de Montréal), Montreal, Quebec, Canada.
(2)Department of Microbiology, Infectiology, and Immunology, University of
Montreal, Montreal, Quebec, Canada.
(3)Molecular Biology Program, University of Montreal, Montreal, Quebec, Canada.
(4)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, McGill University, Montreal,
Quebec, Canada.

Human patients with homozygous null mutations in the ICOS gene suffer from
recurrent infections due to humoral immune defects. Studies on human patients and
mouse models have shown that inducible T-cell co-stimulator (ICOS)-deficient
individuals cannot form T follicular helper (Tfh) cells, a group of CD4 T cells
that migrate into B cell follicles and facilitate germinal center (GC) reactions.
ICOS-induced phosphoinositide 3-kinase signaling pathways have been shown to play
critical roles in Tfh programming, migration of Tfh cells into the GC, and
delivery of T cell help during Tfh-GC B cell conjugation. These processes are
also assisted by ICOS-mediated intracellular calcium mobilization and
TANK-binding kinase 1 signaling. However, ICOS signaling also has stimulatory
roles in T regulatory cells and innate lymphoid cells (ILCs), providing another
layer of complexity. In this review, we discuss cell-type-specific signaling
mechanisms utilized by ICOS in Tfh cells, T regulatory cells, and ILCs. Whenever 
relevant, we compare the roles and signaling pathways of ICOS and CD28.
Understanding ICOS signal transduction mechanisms used by distinct immune subsets
at different stages of immune responses or disease progression may help improve
vaccination protocols, treat autoimmune diseases, and enhance cancer
immunotherapy.

© 2019 John Wiley & Sons A/S. Published by John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/imr.12771 
PMID: 31402504  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

