
1. Front Cell Infect Microbiol. 2019 Aug 2;9:279. doi: 10.3389/fcimb.2019.00279.
eCollection 2019.

Rubicon-Dependent Lc3 Recruitment to Salmonella-Containing Phagosomes Is a Host
Defense Mechanism Triggered Independently From Major Bacterial Virulence Factors.

Masud S(1), van der Burg L(1), Storm L(1), Prajsnar TK(1), Meijer AH(1).

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Biology Leiden, Leiden University, Leiden, Netherlands.

Intracellular pathogens such as Salmonella depend on their molecular virulence
factors to evade host defense responses like autophagy. Using a zebrafish
systemic infection model, we have previously shown that phagocytes, predominantly
macrophages, target Salmonella Typhimurium by an autophagy-related pathway known 
as Lc3-associated phagocytosis (LAP), which is dependent on the host protein
Rubicon. Here, we explore the influence of Salmonella virulence factors on
pathogenicity in the zebrafish model and induction of LAP as a defense response. 
We investigated five mutant strains that all could trigger GFP-Lc3 recruitment as
puncta or rings around single bacteria or bacterial clusters, in a
Rubicon-dependent manner. We found that S. Typhimurium strains carrying mutations
in PhoP or PurA, responsible for adaptation to the intracellular environment and 
efficient metabolism of purines, respectively, are attenuated in the zebrafish
model. However, both strains show increased virulence when LAP is inhibited by
knockdown of Rubicon. Mutations in type III secretion systems 1 and 2, SipB and
SsrB, which are important for invading and replicating in non-phagocytic cells,
did not affect the ability to establish successful infection in the zebrafish
model. This observation is in line with our previous characterization of this
infection model revealing that macrophages actively phagocytose the majority of
S. Typhimurium. In contrast to SipB mutants, SsrB mutants were unable to become
more virulent in Rubicon-deficient hosts, suggesting that type III system 2
effectors are important for intracellular replication of Salmonella in the
absence of LAP. Finally, we found that mutation of FlhD, required for production 
of flagella, renders S. Typhimurium hypervirulent both in wild type zebrafish
embryos and in Rubicon-deficient hosts. FlhD mutation also led to lower levels of
GFP-Lc3 recruitment compared with the wild type strain, indicating that
recognition of flagellin by the host innate immune system promotes the LAP
response. Together, our results provide new evidence that the Rubicon-dependent
LAP process is an important defense mechanism against S. Typhimurium.

DOI: 10.3389/fcimb.2019.00279 
PMCID: PMC6688089
PMID: 31428591  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

