
1. Microb Pathog. 2019 Nov;136:103670. doi: 10.1016/j.micpath.2019.103670. Epub 2019
Aug 17.

Transmission of Francisella noatuensis subsp. orientalis from subclinically
infected hybrid red tilapia broodstock (Oreochromis sp.) to their offspring.

Nguyen VV(1), Dong HT(2), Senapin S(3), Gangnonngiw W(3), Pirarat N(4),
Kayansamruaj P(5), Rung-Ruangkijkrai T(6), Rodkhum C(7).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology, Faculty of Veterinary Science, Chulalongkorn
University, Bangkok, Thailand; Research Institute of Aquaculture No. 1 (RIA1),
Dinh Bang, Tu Son, Bac Ninh, Viet Nam.
(2)Faculty of Science and Technology, Suan Sunandha Rajabhat University, Bangkok,
Thailand. Electronic address: hathanh.do@ssru.ac.th.
(3)National Center for Genetic Engineering and Biotechnology (BIOTEC), National
Science and Technology Development Agency (NSTDA), Pathumthani, Thailand; Center 
of Excellence for Shrimp Molecular Biology and Biotechnology (Centex Shrimp),
Faculty of Science, Mahidol University, Bangkok, Thailand.
(4)Department of Pathology, Faculty of Veterinary Science, Chulalongkorn
University, Bangkok, 10330, Thailand.
(5)Department of Aquaculture, Faculty of Fisheries, Kasetsart University,
Bangkok, Thailand.
(6)Department of Veterinary Anatomy, Faculty of Veterinary Science, Chulalongkorn
University, Bangkok, Thailand.
(7)Department of Microbiology, Faculty of Veterinary Science, Chulalongkorn
University, Bangkok, Thailand; Fish Infectious Diseases Research Unit (FID RU),
Faculty of Veterinary Science, Chulalongkorn University, Bangkok, Thailand.
Electronic address: Channarong.R@chula.ac.th.

Francisella noatunensis subsp. orientalis (Fno) has been reported as an important
bacterial pathogen causing significant mortality (30-95%) in farmed tilapia in
broad geographic areas. However, we found that there was a proportion of
broodfish in our laboratory that appeared to be healthy but which tested positive
for Fno. We therefore hypothesized that Fno might be able to be transmitted from 
subclinically infected tilapia mouthbrooders to their offspring through the
current practice of fry production in tilapia hatcheries. To prove this,
experimentally infected hybrid red tilapia broodstock were mated and their
offspring were examined for the presence of Fno. In this study, three pairs of
infected broodfish were mated for natural spawning and fertilized eggs from each 
couple were then collected from the female mouths for artificial incubation. The 
newly hatched larvae were cultured for 30 days and sample collection was
performed at different developmental stages i.e. yolk-sac larvae, 5 and 30-day
old fry. The results showed that the ovary and testis of all 3 pairs of the
broodstock, as well as their fertilized eggs and offspring were Fno positive by
Fno-specific PCR and in situ DNA hybridization. In summary, this study revealed
that with the current practice in tilapia hatcheries, Fno might be able to
transmit from subclinically infected tilapia mouthbrooders to their offspring.
Therefore, using Fno-free broodfish in tilapia hatcheries should be considered in
order to produce Fno-free tilapia fry.

Copyright © 2019 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.micpath.2019.103670 
PMID: 31430526  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

