
1. Appl Environ Microbiol. 2019 Oct 16;85(21). pii: e01720-19. doi:
10.1128/AEM.01720-19. Print 2019 Nov 1.

Bioremediation of Dichlorodiphenyltrichloroethane (DDT)-Contaminated Agricultural
Soils: Potential of Two Autochthonous Saprotrophic Fungal Strains.

Russo F(1), Ceci A(1), Pinzari F(2), Siciliano A(3), Guida M(3), Malusà E(4),
Tartanus M(4), Miszczak A(4), Maggi O(5), Persiani AM(5).

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Fungal Biodiversity, Department of Environmental Biology,
Sapienza University of Rome, Rome, Italy fabiana.russo@uniroma1.it
andrea.ceci@uniroma1.it.
(2)Consiglio per la Ricerca in Agricoltura e l'Analisi dell'Economia Agraria
(CREA), Centro di Ricerca Agricoltura e Ambiente, Rome, Italy.
(3)Ecotoxicology Research Laboratory, Department of Biology, University of Naples
Federico II, Naples, Italy.
(4)Research Institute of Horticulture, Skierniewice, Poland.
(5)Laboratory of Fungal Biodiversity, Department of Environmental Biology,
Sapienza University of Rome, Rome, Italy.

DDT (dichlorodiphenyltrichloroethane) was used worldwide as an organochlorine
insecticide to control agricultural pests and vectors of several insect-borne
human diseases. It was banned in most industrialized countries; however, due to
its persistence in the environment, DDT residues remain in environmental
compartments, becoming long-term sources of exposure. To identify and select
fungal species suitable for bioremediation of DDT-contaminated sites, soil
samples were collected from DDT-contaminated agricultural soils in Poland, and 38
fungal taxa among 18 genera were isolated. Two of them, Trichoderma hamatum FBL
587 and Rhizopus arrhizus FBL 578, were tested for tolerance in the presence of
1-mg liter-1 DDT concentration by using two indices based on fungal growth rate
and biomass production (the tolerance indices Rt:Rc and TI), showing a clear
tolerance to DDT. The two selected strains were studied to evaluate catabolic
versatility on 95 carbon sources with or without DDT by using the Phenotype
MicroArray system and to investigate the induced oxidative stress responses. The 
two strains were able to use most of the substrates provided, resulting in both
high metabolic versatility and ecological functionality in the use of carbon
sources, despite the presence of DDT. The activation of specific metabolic
responses with species-dependent antioxidant enzymes to cope with the induced
chemical stress has been hypothesized, since the presence of DDT promoted a
higher formation of reactive oxygen species in fungal cells than the controls.
The tested fungi represent attractive potential candidates for bioremediation of 
DDT-contaminated soil and are worthy of further investigations.IMPORTANCE The
spread and environmental accumulation of DDT over the years represent not only a 
threat to human health and ecological security but also a major challenge because
of the complex chemical processes and technologies required for remediation.
Saprotrophic fungi, isolated from contaminated sites, hold promise for their
bioremediation potential toward toxic organic compounds, since they might provide
an environment-friendly solution to contamination. Once we verified the high
tolerance of autochthonous fungal strains to high concentrations of DDT, we
showed how fungi from different phyla demonstrate a high metabolic versatility in
the presence of DDT. The isolates showed the singular ability to keep their
functionality, despite the DDT-induced production of reactive oxygen species.

Copyright © 2019 American Society for Microbiology.

DOI: 10.1128/AEM.01720-19 
PMCID: PMC6803318
PMID: 31444208  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

