
1. BMC Bioinformatics. 2019 Aug 27;20(1):441. doi: 10.1186/s12859-019-3008-x.

An equivalence approach to the integrative analysis of feature lists.

Sánchez-Pla A(1), Salicrú M(2), Ocaña J(2).

Author information: 
(1)Genetics, Microbiology and Statistics Department, Universitat de Barcelona,
Avinguda Diagonal, 648, Barcelona, 08028, Spain. asanchez@ub.edu.
(2)Genetics, Microbiology and Statistics Department, Universitat de Barcelona,
Avinguda Diagonal, 648, Barcelona, 08028, Spain.

BACKGROUND: Although a few comparison methods based on the biological meaning of 
gene lists have been developed, the goProfiles approach is one of the few that
are being used for that purpose. It consists of projecting lists of genes into
predefined levels of the Gene Ontology, in such a way that a multinomial model
can be used for estimation and testing. Of particular interest is the fact that
it may be used for proving equivalence (in the sense of "enough similarity")
between two lists, instead of proving differences between them, which seems
conceptually better suited to the end goal of establishing similarity among gene 
lists. An equivalence method has been derived that uses a distance-based approach
and the confidence interval inclusion principle. Equivalence is declared if the
upper limit of a one-sided confidence interval for the distance between two
profiles is below a pre-established equivalence limit.
RESULTS: In this work, this method is extended to establish the equivalence of
any number of gene lists. Additionally, an algorithm to obtain the smallest
equivalence limit that would allow equivalence between two or more lists to be
declared is presented. This algorithm is at the base of an iterative method of
graphic visualization to represent the most to least equivalent gene lists. These
methods deal adequately with the problem of adjusting for multiple testing. The
applicability of these techniques is illustrated in two typical situations: (i) a
collection of cancer-related gene lists, suggesting which of them are more
reasonable to combine -as claimed by the authors- and (ii) a collection of
pathogenesis-based transcript sets, showing which of these are more closely
related. The methods developed are available in the goProfiles Bioconductor
package.
CONCLUSIONS: The method provides a simple yet powerful and statistically
well-grounded way to classify a set of genes or other feature lists by
establishing their equivalence at a given equivalence threshold. The
classification results can be viewed using standard visualization methods. This
may be applied to a variety of problems, from deciding whether a series of
datasets generating the lists can be combined to the simplification of groups of 
lists.

DOI: 10.1186/s12859-019-3008-x 
PMCID: PMC6712676
PMID: 31455218  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

