
1. Appl Environ Microbiol. 2019 Oct 30;85(22). pii: e01625-19. doi:
10.1128/AEM.01625-19. Print 2019 Nov 15.

Chemotaxis of Pseudomonas putida F1 to Alcohols Is Mediated by the Carboxylic
Acid Receptor McfP.

Zhang X(1)(2), Hughes JG(1), Subuyuj GA(1), Ditty JL(3), Parales RE(4).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Molecular Genetics, College of Biological
Sciences, University of California Davis, Davis, California, USA.
(2)Jiangsu Provincial Key Laboratory of Coastal Wetland Bioresources and
Environmental Protection, Yancheng Teachers University, Yancheng, China.
(3)Department of Biology, College of Arts and Sciences, University of St. Thomas,
St. Paul, Minnesota, USA.
(4)Department of Microbiology and Molecular Genetics, College of Biological
Sciences, University of California Davis, Davis, California, USA
reparales@ucdavis.edu.

Although alcohols are toxic to many microorganisms, they are good carbon and
energy sources for some bacteria, including many pseudomonads. However, most
studies that have examined chemosensory responses to alcohols have reported that 
alcohols are sensed as repellents, which is consistent with their toxic
properties. In this study, we examined the chemotaxis of Pseudomonas putida
strain F1 to n-alcohols with chain lengths of 1 to 12 carbons. P. putida F1 was
attracted to all n-alcohols that served as growth substrates (C2 to C12) for the 
strain, and the responses were induced when cells were grown in the presence of
alcohols. By assaying mutant strains lacking single or multiple methyl-accepting 
chemotaxis proteins, the receptor mediating the response to C2 to C12 alcohols
was identified as McfP, the ortholog of the P. putida strain KT2440 receptor for 
C2 and C3 carboxylic acids. Besides being a requirement for the response to
n-alcohols, McfP was required for the response of P. putida F1 to pyruvate,
l-lactate, acetate, and propionate, which are detected by the KT2440 receptor,
and the medium- and long-chain carboxylic acids hexanoic acid and dodecanoic
acid. β-Galactosidase assays of P. putida F1 carrying an mcfP-lacZ
transcriptional fusion showed that the mcfP gene is not induced in response to
alcohols. Together, our results are consistent with the idea that the carboxylic 
acids generated from the oxidation of alcohols are the actual attractants sensed 
by McfP in P. putida F1, rather than the alcohols themselves.IMPORTANCE Alcohols,
released as fermentation products and produced as intermediates in the catabolism
of many organic compounds, including hydrocarbons and fatty acids, are common
components of the microbial food web in soil and sediments. Although they serve
as good carbon and energy sources for many soil bacteria, alcohols have primarily
been reported to be repellents rather than attractants for motile bacteria.
Little is known about how alcohols are sensed by microbes in the environment. We 
report here that catabolizable n-alcohols with linear chains of up to 12 carbons 
serve as attractants for the soil bacterium Pseudomonas putida, and rather than
being detected directly, alcohols appear to be catabolized to acetate, which is
then sensed by a specific cell-surface chemoreceptor protein.

Copyright © 2019 American Society for Microbiology.

DOI: 10.1128/AEM.01625-19 
PMCID: PMC6821966
PMID: 31471307  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

