
1. Pak J Pharm Sci. 2019 May;32(3 Special):1301-1306.

Moxifloxacin-Ester derivatives: Synthesis, characterization and pharmacological
evaluation.

Akhtar M(1), Sultana N(2), Arayne MS(3), Siddiqi TA(4), Khan A(5).

Author information: 
(1)Dow College of Pharmacy, Dow University of Health Sciences, Karachi, Pakistan.
(2)Department of Pharmaceutical Chemistry, Faculty of Pharmacy and Pharmaceutical
Sciences, University of Karachi, Pakistan.
(3)Department of Chemistry, University of Karachi, Karachi, Pakistan.
(4)Department of Mathematics, University of Karachi, Karachi, Pakistan.
(5)HEJ Research Institute of Chemistry, International Center for Chemical and
Biological Sciences, University of Karachi, Karachi, Pakistan.

It is known that resistance of bacteria is one of the major issues in drug
treatment. To cope this issue, it is required to synthesize new analogues which
contest against mutated bacteria. This research study included synthesis of
several derivatives of moxifloxacin by adding different phenol and alkyl halide
at third position of carboxylic group with esterification reaction and the
structures of synthesized derivatives were characterized by spectroscopic
techniques i.e. 1H NMR, FT-IR and mass-spectrometry. In continuation,
antimicrobial activities of the analogues were also evaluated against number of
Gram-positive, Gram-negative bacteria and fungi. The experimental results of
novel derivatives exhibit significant antibacterial and antifungal profile in
which so many synthesized derivatives influenced a similar and enhanced activity 
against selected microbes that were S. typhi, P. mirabilis, P. aeruginosa, S.
flexneri, B. subtilis as compared to the moxifloxacin. Moreover, few innovative
derivatives were also produced better anti-fungal activity against F. solani and 
T. rubrum. Furthermore, the enzymatic activity of all analogues has been analyzed
against urease and carbonic anhydrase and concluded that C2 was selected
inhibitor of urease enzyme.


PMID: 31551207  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

