
1. Front Oncol. 2019 Aug 20;9:753. doi: 10.3389/fonc.2019.00753. eCollection 2019.

The Flick of a Switch: Conferring Survival Advantage to Breast Cancer Stem Cells 
Through Metabolic Plasticity.

Walsh HR(1), Cruickshank BM(1), Brown JM(1), Marcato P(1)(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Dalhousie University, Halifax, NS, Canada.
(2)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, Dalhousie University, Halifax, NS, 
Canada.

Within heterogeneous tumors, cancer stem cell (CSC) populations exhibit the
greatest tumor initiation potential, promote metastasis, and contribute to
therapy resistance. For breast cancer specifically, CSCs are identified by
CD44highCD24low cell surface marker expression and increased aldehyde
dehydrogenase activity. In general, bulk breast tumor cells possess altered
energetics characterized by aerobic glycolysis. In contrast, breast CSCs appear
to have adaptive metabolic plasticity that allows these tumor-initiating cells to
switch between glycolysis and oxidative phosphorylation, depending on factors
present in the tumor microenvironment (e.g., hypoxia, reactive oxygen species,
availability of glucose). In this article, we review the regulatory molecules
that may facilitate the metabolic plasticity of breast CSCs. These regulatory
factors include epigenetic chromatin modifiers, non-coding RNAs, transcriptional 
repressors, transcription factors, energy and stress sensors, and metabolic
enzymes. Furthermore, breast cancer cells acquire CSC-like characteristics and
altered energetics by undergoing epithelial-mesenchymal transition (EMT). This
energy costly process is paired with reprogrammed glucose metabolism by
epigenetic modifiers that regulate expression of both EMT and other
metabolism-regulating genes. The survival advantage imparted to breast CSCs by
metabolic plasticity suggests that targeting the factors that mediate the
energetic switch should hinder tumorigenesis and lead to improved patient
outcomes.

DOI: 10.3389/fonc.2019.00753 
PMCID: PMC6736574
PMID: 31552162 

