
1. Cryobiology. 2020 Feb 1;92:21-25. doi: 10.1016/j.cryobiol.2019.09.011. Epub 2019 
Sep 26.

Leukapheresis cell concentration adjustment required for a successful recovery of
HSC after cryopreservation.

Mohammed RN(1), Ahmad D(2), Khoshnaw N(3), Hassan DO(2), Abdulrahman HA(4), Vacca
M(5), Possenti M(5), Faruq D(2), Omer H(2), Muhamad S(2), Majolino I(6), Othman
DN(3).

Author information: 
(1)Bone Marrow Transplant Center, Hiwa Cancer Hospital, Kurdistan, Iraq;
Department of Microbiology, College of Veterinary Medicine, University of
Sulaimani, Kurdistan, Iraq. Electronic address: rebar.mohammed@univsul.edu.iq.
(2)Bone Marrow Transplant Center, Hiwa Cancer Hospital, Kurdistan, Iraq.
(3)Bone Marrow Transplant Center, Hiwa Cancer Hospital, Kurdistan, Iraq;
Department of Hematology, Kurdistan Board for Medical Specialties, Erbil,
Kurdistan Region, Iraq.
(4)Research Center, Polytechnic University of Sulaimani, Iraq.
(5)Ospedale San Camillo, and Salvator Mundi International Hospital-University of 
Pittsburgh Medical Center, Rome, Italy.
(6)Bone Marrow Transplant Center, Hiwa Cancer Hospital, Kurdistan, Iraq; Ospedale
San Camillo, and Salvator Mundi International Hospital-University of Pittsburgh
Medical Center, Rome, Italy.

The recovering of an adequate number of hematopoietic stem cells after
cryopreservation is considered pivotal for successful transplantation. Various
factors could influence the recovery of HSC following processing and
cryopreservation. Therefore, leukapheresis product from thirty patients was
cryopreserved in 10% DMSO in cryopreservation bags for their autologous bone
marrow transplantation, and 2 ml were cryopreserved in cryovials for post-thaw
viability assessment by flow cytometry. The percentage of viable HSCs recovered
post-cryopreservation in leukapheresis product was significantly influenced by
the concentration of the total nucleated cells cryopreserved per volume. Patients
receiving a higher rate of viable HSCs resulted in earlier engraftment of both
neutrophils and platelets, so they have been discharged earlier from the
hospital. Furthermore, Storage temperature and duration played a role in the
recovery of these cells and for the support of the findings, age of the patient
at the time of collection did not show any impact on the recovery of this HSC
post-cryopreservation. In conclusion, various influencing factors must be taken
into consideration during the cryopreservation of HSCs, especially for poor
mobilizing patients with a low number of collected hematopoietic stem cells.

Copyright © 2019 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.cryobiol.2019.09.011 
PMID: 31563591  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of competing interest The Authors
declare no conflict of interest.

