
1. mBio. 2019 Oct 1;10(5). pii: e02248-19. doi: 10.1128/mBio.02248-19.

Complex Multilevel Control of Hemolysin Production by Uropathogenic Escherichia
coli.

Nhu NTK(1)(2), Phan MD(1)(2), Forde BM(1)(2)(3), Murthy AMV(2)(4), Peters
KM(1)(2), Day CJ(5), Poole J(5), Kidd TJ(1)(2), Welch RA(6), Jennings MP(5),
Ulett GC(7), Sweet MJ(2)(4), Beatson SA(1)(2)(3), Schembri MA(8)(2).

Author information: 
(1)School of Chemistry and Molecular Biosciences, The University of Queensland,
Brisbane, Queensland, Australia.
(2)Australian Infectious Diseases Research Centre, The University of Queensland, 
Brisbane, Queensland, Australia.
(3)Australian Centre for Ecogenomics, The University of Queensland, Brisbane,
Queensland, Australia.
(4)Institute for Molecular Bioscience (IMB) and IMB Centre for Inflammation and
Disease Research, The University of Queensland, Brisbane, Queensland, Australia.
(5)Institute for Glycomics, Griffith University Gold Coast Campus, Gold Coast,
Queensland, Australia.
(6)Department of Medical Microbiology and Immunology, School of Medicine and
Public Health, University of Wisconsin, Madison, Wisconsin, USA.
(7)School of Medical Sciences, and Menzies Health Institute Queensland, Griffith 
University, Southport, Australia.
(8)School of Chemistry and Molecular Biosciences, The University of Queensland,
Brisbane, Queensland, Australia m.schembri@uq.edu.au.

Uropathogenic Escherichia coli (UPEC) is the major cause of urinary tract
infections. Nearly half of all UPEC strains secrete hemolysin, a cytotoxic
pore-forming toxin. Here, we show that the prevalence of the hemolysin toxin gene
(hlyA) is highly variable among the most common 83 E. coli sequence types (STs)
represented on the EnteroBase genome database. To explore this diversity in the
context of a defined monophyletic lineage, we contextualized sequence variation
of the hlyCABD operon within the genealogy of the globally disseminated
multidrug-resistant ST131 clone. We show that sequence changes in hlyCABD and its
newly defined 1.616-kb-long leader sequence correspond to phylogenetic
designation, and that ST131 strains with the strongest hemolytic activity belong 
to the most extensive multidrug-resistant sublineage (clade C2). To define the
set of genes involved in hemolysin production, the clade C2 strain S65EC was
completely sequenced and subjected to a genome-wide screen by combining saturated
transposon mutagenesis and transposon-directed insertion site sequencing with the
capacity to lyse red blood cells. Using this approach, and subsequent targeted
mutagenesis and complementation, 13 genes were confirmed to be specifically
required for production of active hemolysin. New hemolysin-controlling elements
included discrete sets of genes involved in lipopolysaccharide (LPS) inner core
biosynthesis (waaC, waaF, waaG, and rfaE) and cytoplasmic chaperone activity
(dnaK and dnaJ), and we show these are required for hemolysin secretion. Overall,
this work provides a unique description of hemolysin sequence diversity in a
single clonal lineage and describes a complex multilevel system of regulatory
control for this important toxin.IMPORTANCE Uropathogenic E. coli (UPEC) is the
major cause of urinary tract infections and a frequent cause of sepsis. Nearly
half of all UPEC strains produce the potent cytotoxin hemolysin, and its
expression is associated with enhanced virulence. In this study, we explored
hemolysin variation within the globally dominant UPEC ST131 clone, finding that
strains from the ST131 sublineage with the greatest multidrug resistance also
possess the strongest hemolytic activity. We also employed an innovative forward 
genetic screen to define the set of genes required for hemolysin production.
Using this approach, and subsequent targeted mutagenesis and complementation, we 
identified new hemolysin-controlling elements involved in LPS inner core
biosynthesis and cytoplasmic chaperone activity, and we show that mechanistically
they are required for hemolysin secretion. These original discoveries
substantially enhance our understanding of hemolysin regulation, secretion and
function.

Copyright © 2019 Nhu et al.

DOI: 10.1128/mBio.02248-19 
PMCID: PMC6775461
PMID: 31575773  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

