
1. J Indian Soc Pedod Prev Dent. 2019 Jul-Sep;37(3):286-291. doi:
10.4103/JISPPD.JISPPD_62_19.

Effect of three different compositions of topical fluoride varnishes with and
without prior oral prophylaxis on Streptococcus mutans count in biofilm samples
of children aged 2-8 years: A randomized controlled trial.

Yadav S(1), Sachdev V(1), Malik M(1), Chopra R(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pedodontics and Preventive Dentistry, ITS-CDSR, Muradnagar,
Ghaziabad, Uttar Pradesh, India.

Background: Various strategies for controlling caries focus on disrupting the
interaction between risk factors. Of these, fluoride varnish has been shown to
reduce the colony-forming (CFU) units and water-insoluble extracellular
polysaccharide amount. Casein phosphopeptide-amorphous calcium phosphate
(CPP-ACP) and xylitol-containing fluoride varnishes have recently gained
importance as caries-protective fluoride varnishes.
Aim: This study aims to assess and compare the reduction in Streptococcus mutans 
count in biofilm samples after topical application of three different fluoride
varnishes and to evaluate the effect of oral prophylaxis prior to fluoride
varnish application.
Materials and Methods: Sixty healthy children with no active caries, in the age
group of 2-8 years, were randomly divided into Group A = fluoride varnish
containing CPP-ACP; Group B = fluoride varnish containing xylitol; and Group C = 
fluoride varnish with 0.9% difluorosilane; further, the groups were divided into 
two subgroups, namely A1, B1, and C1 with prior oral prophylaxis and A2, B2, and 
C2 without oral prophylaxis. Plaque samples were collected at baseline, 1st
month, and 3rd month; cultured; and incubated, and CFU/ml was calculated.
Results: Data were compiled, and CFU/ml was analyzed by independent t-test,
paired t-test, and one-way ANOVA. There was no statistical difference between the
fluoride groups. Furthermore, no statistically significant difference was seen
between the subgroups.
Conclusion: Fluoride varnish containing CPP-ACP showed higher reduction in S.
mutans count followed by xylitol-containing fluoride varnish and Fluor
Protector®. There was no effect of prior oral prophylaxis on the efficacy of
fluoride varnish.

DOI: 10.4103/JISPPD.JISPPD_62_19 
PMID: 31584030  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: None

