
1. Limnol Oceanogr. 2019 Jul;64(4):1423-1441. doi: 10.1002/lno.11125. Epub 2019 Feb 
5.

Degradation of macroalgal detritus in shallow coastal Antarctic sediments.

Braeckman U(1)(2), Pasotti F(1), Vázquez S(3), Zacher K(4), Hoffmann R(2), Elvert
M(5), Marchant H(6), Buckner C(6), Quartino ML(7)(8), Mác Cormack W(3)(7),
Soetaert K(9), Wenzhöfer F(2), Vanreusel A(1).

Author information: 
(1)Marine Biology Research Group Ghent University Ghent Belgium.
(2)HGF-MPG Group for Deep Sea Ecology and Technology, Alfred Wegener Institute
Helmholtz Center for Polar and Marine Research, Bremerhaven and Max Planck
Institute for Marine Microbiology Bremen Germany.
(3)Cátedra de Biotecnología, Facultad de Farmacia y Bioquímica Universidad de
Buenos Aires, NANOBIOTEC UBA-CONICET Buenos Aires Argentina.
(4)Functional Ecology, Alfred Wegener Institute Helmholtz Center for Polar and
Marine Research Bremerhaven Germany.
(5)MARUM Center for Marine Environmental Sciences and Department of Geosciences
University of Bremen Bremen Germany.
(6)Biogeochemistry Group Max Planck Institute for Marine Microbiology Bremen
Germany.
(7)Instituto Antártico Argentino, Coastal Biology Department Buenos Aires
Argentina.
(8)Museo Argentino de Ciencias Naturales Bernardino Rivadavia Buenos Aires
Argentina.
(9)NIOZ Yerseke, Estuarine and Delta Studies and Utrecht University The
Netherlands.

Glaciers along the western Antarctic Peninsula are retreating at unprecedented
rates, opening up sublittoral rocky substrate for colonization by marine
organisms such as macroalgae. When macroalgae are physically detached due to
storms or erosion, their fragments can accumulate in seabed hollows, where they
can be grazed upon by herbivores or be degraded microbially or be sequestered. To
understand the fate of the increasing amount of macroalgal detritus in Antarctic 
shallow subtidal sediments, a mesocosm experiment was conducted to track 13C- and
15N-labeled macroalgal detritus into the benthic bacterial, meiofaunal, and
macrofaunal biomass and respiration of sediments from Potter Cove (King George
Island). We compared the degradation pathways of two macroalgae species: one
considered palatable for herbivores (the red algae Palmaria decipiens) and other 
considered nonpalatable for herbivores (the brown algae Desmarestia anceps). The 
carbon from Palmaria was recycled at a higher rate than that of Desmarestia, with
herbivores such as amphipods playing a stronger role in the early degradation
process of the Palmaria fragments and the microbial community taking over at a
later stage. In contrast, Desmarestia was more buried in the subsurface
sediments, stimulating subsurface bacterial degradation. Macrofauna probably
relied indirectly on Desmarestia carbon, recycled by bacteria and
microphytobenthos. The efficient cycling of the nutrients and carbon from the
macroalgae supports a positive feedback loop among bacteria, microphytobenthos,
and meiofaunal and macrofaunal grazers, resulting in longer term retention of
macroalgal nutrients in the sediment, hence creating a food bank for the benthos.

© 2019 The Authors. Limnology and Oceanography published by Wiley Periodicals,
Inc. on behalf of Association for the Sciences of Limnology and Oceanography.

DOI: 10.1002/lno.11125 
PMCID: PMC6774326
PMID: 31598006 

Conflict of interest statement: None declared.

