
1. J Pathol. 2020 Jan;250(1):95-106. doi: 10.1002/path.5354. Epub 2019 Nov 25.

Prekallikrein inhibits innate immune signaling in the lung and impairs host
defense during pneumosepsis in mice.

Ding C(1)(2), Scicluna BP(2)(3), Stroo I(2), Yang J(2), Roelofs JJ(4), de Boer
OJ(4), de Vos AF(2), Nürnberg P(5)(6), Revenko AS(7), Crosby J(7), Van't Veer
C(2), van der Poll T(2)(8).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Gastric Surgery, Sun Yat-sen University Cancer Center, State Key
Laboratory of Oncology in South China, Collaborative Innovation Center for Cancer
Medicine, Guangzhou, PR China.
(2)Center of Experimental & Molecular Medicine, Amsterdam University Medical
Centers, location Academic Medical Center, University of Amsterdam, Amsterdam,
The Netherlands.
(3)Department of Clinical Epidemiology and Biostatistics, Amsterdam University
Medical Centers, location Academic Medical Center, University of Amsterdam,
Amsterdam, The Netherlands.
(4)Department of Pathology, Amsterdam University Medical Centers, location
Academic Medical Center, University of Amsterdam, Amsterdam, The Netherlands.
(5)Cologne Center for Genomics (CCG), University of Cologne, Cologne, Germany.
(6)Center for Molecular Medicine Cologne (CMMC), University of Cologne, Cologne, 
Germany.
(7)Drug Discovery, Ionis Pharmaceuticals, Inc, Carlsbad, CA, USA.
(8)Division of Infectious Diseases, Amsterdam University Medical Centers,
location Academic Medical Center, University of Amsterdam, Amsterdam, The
Netherlands.

Prekallikrein (PKK, also known as Fletcher factor and encoded by the gene KLKB1
in humans) is a component of the contact system. Activation of the contact system
has been implicated in lethality in fulminant sepsis models. Pneumonia is the
most frequent cause of sepsis. We sought to determine the role of PKK in host
defense during pneumosepsis. To this end, mice were infected with the common
human pathogen Klebsiella pneumoniae via the airways, causing an initially
localized infection of the lungs with subsequent bacterial dissemination and
sepsis. Mice were treated with a selective PKK-directed antisense oligonucleotide
(ASO) or a scrambled control ASO for 3 weeks prior to infection. Host response
readouts were determined at 12 or 36 h post-infection, including genome-wide
messenger RNA profiling of lungs, or mice were followed for survival. PKK ASO
treatment inhibited constitutive hepatic Klkb1 mRNA expression by >80% and almost
completely abolished plasma PKK activity. Klkb1 mRNA could not be detected in
lungs. Pneumonia was associated with a progressive decline in PKK expression in
mice treated with control ASO. PKK ASO administration was associated with a
delayed mortality, reduced bacterial burdens, and diminished distant organ
injury. While PKK depletion did not influence lung pathology or neutrophil
recruitment, it was associated with an upregulation of multiple innate immune
signaling pathways in the lungs already prior to infection. Activation of the
contact system could not be detected, either during infection in vivo or at the
surface of Klebsiella in vitro. These data suggest that circulating PKK confines 
pro-inflammatory signaling in the lung by a mechanism that does not involve
contact system activation, which in the case of respiratory tract infection may
impede early protective innate immunity. © 2019 Authors. Journal of Pathology
published by John Wiley & Sons Ltd on behalf of Pathological Society of Great
Britain and Ireland.

© 2019 Authors. Journal of Pathology published by John Wiley & Sons Ltd on behalf
of Pathological Society of Great Britain and Ireland.

DOI: 10.1002/path.5354 
PMCID: PMC6972537
PMID: 31595971  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

