
1. BMC Microbiol. 2019 Oct 16;19(1):226. doi: 10.1186/s12866-019-1598-0.

Characterization of Salmonella Dublin isolated from bovine and human hosts.

Paudyal N(1)(2), Pan H(1), Elbediwi M(1), Zhou X(1), Peng X(1), Li X(1)(3), Fang 
W(1)(3), Yue M(4)(5).

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Preventive Veterinary Medicine, College of Animal Sciences,
Zhejiang University, Hangzhou, China.
(2)Animal Health Research Division (AHRD), Nepal Agricultural Research Council
(NARC), Kathmandu, Nepal.
(3)Zhejiang Provincial Laboratory of Preventive Veterinary Medicine, Hangzhou,
China.
(4)Institute of Preventive Veterinary Medicine, College of Animal Sciences,
Zhejiang University, Hangzhou, China. myue@zju.edu.cn.
(5)Zhejiang Provincial Laboratory of Preventive Veterinary Medicine, Hangzhou,
China. myue@zju.edu.cn.

BACKGROUND: Salmonella enterica subsp. enterica serovar Dublin (S. Dublin), a
cattle adapted serovar causes enteritis, and systemic disease in bovines. The
invasive index of this serovar far exceeds that of the other serovars and human
infections often present as fatal or highly resistant infections. In this,
observational study, phenotypic properties of human and bovine-derived isolates
of S. Dublin along with antibiogram of common antimicrobials were evaluated. The 
multiplex PCR confirmed isolates were genotyped using 7-gene legacy MLST. MIC
assay was done by broth microdilution method. Previously published protocols were
used to assess the motility, biofilm formation and morphotype. Vi antigen was
agglutinated using commercial antiserum. Caenorhabditis elegans infection model
was used to evaluate the virulence potiential. Phenotyping experiments were done 
in duplicates while virulence assay was done in triplicates. Whole-genome
sequencing was used to predict the genes responsible for acquired resistance and 
a genotype-phenotype comparison was made.
RESULTS: We evaluated 96 bovine and 10 human isolates in this study. All the
isolates belonged to ST10 in eBG53 and were negative for Vi-antigen. The swarming
motility, biofilm formation and morphotype were variable in the isolates of both 
groups. Resistance to sulfamethoxazole, ampicillin, chloramphenicol, tetracycline
was > 90% in animal isolates whereas resistance to sulfamethoxazole was > 70% in 
human isolates. MDR was also higher in animal isolates. Human isolates were
significantly (P < 0.0001) more virulent than animal isolates on C. elegans
infection model. The genomic comparison based on the core SNPs showed a high
degree of homogeneity between the isolates. The carriage of IncA/C2 plasmid was
seen as a typical feature of isolates from the bovine hosts.
CONCLUSION: Human isolates showed more diversity in the phenotypic assays. Animal
isolates showed a higher degree of antimicrobial resistance with greater MDR but 
human isolates formed more biofilm and had greater swarming motility as well as
increased virulence to the nematode C. elegans. The carriage of IncA/C2 plasmid
could contribute to the distinguishing feature of the bovine isolates. The tandem
use of genotypic-phenotypic assays improves the understanding of diversity and
differential behaviour of the same serovar from unrelated host sources.

DOI: 10.1186/s12866-019-1598-0 
PMCID: PMC6796477
PMID: 31619165  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

