
1. J Infect Dis. 2020 Jan 2;221(2):325-335. doi: 10.1093/infdis/jiz460.

Surface Proteome of Plasma Extracellular Vesicles as Biomarkers for Pneumonia and
Acute Exacerbation of Chronic Obstructive Pulmonary Disease.

Jung AL(1), Møller Jørgensen M(2), Bæk R(2), Griss K(1)(3), Han M(1)(4), Auf Dem 
Brinke K(1), Timmesfeld N(5), Bertrams W(1), Greulich T(6), Koczulla R(6),
Hippenstiel S(3), Suttorp N(3), Schmeck B(1)(6)(7).

Author information: 
(1)Institute for Lung Research, Universities of Giessen and Marburg Lung Center, 
Philipps-University Marburg, Member of the German Center for Lung Research,
Marburg, Germany.
(2)Department of Clinical Immunology, Aalborg University Hospital, Aalborg,
Denmark.
(3)Medizinische Klinik m.S. Infektiologie und Pneumologie,
Charité-Universitätsmedizin Berlin, Berlin, Germany.
(4)Medizinische Klinik m.S. Hämatologie und Onkologie,
Charité-Universitätsmedizin Berlin, Berlin, Germany.
(5)Abteilung für Medizinische Informatik, Biometrie und Epidemiologie,
Ruhr-Universität Bochum, Bochum, Germany.
(6)Department of Medicine, Pulmonary and Critical Care Medicine, University
Medical Center Giessen and Marburg, Philipps-University Marburg, Member of the
German Center for Lung Research, Marburg, Germany.
(7)Center for Synthetic Microbiology (SYNMIKRO), Philipps-University Marburg,
Marburg, Germany.

BACKGROUND: Community-acquired pneumonia (CAP) and acute exacerbation of chronic 
obstructive pulmonary disease (AECOPD) represent a major burden of disease and
death and their differential diagnosis is critical. A potential source of
relevant accessible biomarkers are blood-borne small extracellular vesicles
(sEVs).
METHODS: We performed an extracellular vesicle array to find proteins on plasma
sEVs that are differentially expressed and possibly allow the differential
diagnosis between CAP and AECOPD. Plasma samples were analyzed from 21 healthy
controls, 24 patients with CAP, and 10 with AECOPD . The array contained 40
antibodies to capture sEVs, which were then visualized with a cocktail of
biotin-conjugated CD9, CD63, and CD81 antibodies.
RESULTS: We detected significant differences in the protein decoration of sEVs
between healthy controls and patients with CAP or AECOPD. We found CD45 and CD28 
to be the best discrimination markers between CAP and AECOPD in receiver
operating characteristic analyses, with an area under the curve >0.92. Additional
ensemble feature selection revealed the possibility to distinguish between CAP
and AECOPD even if the patient with CAP had COPD, with a panel of CD45, CD28,
CTLA4 (cytotoxic T-lymphocyte-associated protein 4), tumor necrosis factor-R-II, 
and CD16.
CONCLUSION: The discrimination of sEV-associated proteins is a minimally invasive
method with potential to discriminate between CAP and AECOPD.

© The Author(s) 2019. Published by Oxford University Press for the Infectious
Diseases Society of America. All rights reserved. For permissions, e-mail:
journals.permissions@oup.com.

DOI: 10.1093/infdis/jiz460 
PMID: 31617573  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

