
1. Sichuan Da Xue Xue Bao Yi Xue Ban. 2019 May;50(3):291-297.

[Mycobacterium Tuberculosis Rv3084 Encodes Functional Esterase and Suppresses the
Pro-inflammatory Cytokines in vivo].

[Article in Chinese]

Zhang CX(1), Luo T(1), Ma PJ(1), Wang CH(1), Suo J(1), Zhai XQ(1), Peng X(1), Bao
L(1).

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Infection and Immunity, West China School of Basic Medical
Sciences Forensic & Medicine, Sichuan University, Chengdu 610041, China.

Objective: To explore the biological characteristics of the esterase LipR encoded
by Mycobacterium tuberculosis (MTB) Rv3084 and its immunomodulatory function in
vivo.
Methods: The LipR gene was amplified from MTB H37Rv strain to construct
recombinant expression plasmid. After sequencing, the recombinant plasmid was
transformed into E. coli for expression and purification of LipR protein. The
expressed protein was confirmed with Western blot assay. The hydrolyzing activity
of LipR was detected and the factors affecting LipR enzyme activity were
analyzed. Mice were intramuscularly injected with 0.1 mL (containing plasmid DNA 
100 μg) recombinant eukaryotic plasmid three times (day 1, 8, and 15); seven days
after the last injection, the mice were executed, and the lung and spleen were
taken for cytokine detection.
Results: The recombinant expression plasmid was successfully constructed and it
was found that LipR protein was mainly expressed in the form of inclusion bodies 
in E. coli with the relative molecular mass of about 33×10 3. LipR was
demonstrated as an alkaline eurythermic esterase, due to the preference of
hydrolyzing short carbon chain esters with optimal hydrolyzing activity on
pNP-acetate (pNPA, C2) and the capability in tolerance of high pH and
temperature; in the presence of different detergents or metal ions, the activity 
of LipR hydrolyzing pNP-butyrate (pNPB, C4) was inhibited to some extent. In the 
mouse model, it was found that LipR could inhibit the secretion of interferon-γ
(IFN- γ) and interleukin-2 (IL-2), but to stimulate the secretion of IL-10.
Conclusion: The esterase LipR may be one of the esterases help M. tuberculosis
withstand harsh environment inside the host in collaboration, and simultaneously 
act as an immune modulator to inhibit the secretion of pro-inflammatory cytokines
and consequently impact the killing effect of host immune system against M.
tuberculosis.

Copyright© by Editorial Board of Journal of Sichuan University (Medical Science
Edition).


PMID: 31631592  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

