
1. FEBS J. 2020 May;287(9):1758-1776. doi: 10.1111/febs.15108. Epub 2019 Nov 10.

Engineering transketolase to accept both unnatural donor and acceptor substrates 
and produce α-hydroxyketones.

Yu H(1), Hernández López RI(1), Steadman D(2), Méndez-Sánchez D(2), Higson S(2), 
Cázares-Körner A(2), Sheppard TD(2), Ward JM(1), Hailes HC(2), Dalby PA(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemical Engineering, University College London, UK.
(2)Department of Chemistry, University College London, UK.

A narrow substrate range is a major limitation in exploiting enzymes more widely 
as catalysts in synthetic organic chemistry. For enzymes using two substrates,
the simultaneous optimisation of both substrate specificities is also required
for the rapid expansion of accepted substrates. Transketolase (TK) catalyses the 
reversible transfer of a C2 -ketol unit from a donor substrate to an aldehyde
acceptor and suffers the limitation of narrow substrate scope for industrial
applications. Herein, TK from Escherichia coli was engineered to accept both
pyruvate, as a novel donor substrate, and unnatural acceptor aldehydes, including
propanal, pentanal, hexanal and 3-formylbenzoic acid (FBA). Twenty single-mutant 
variants were first designed and characterised experimentally. Beneficial
mutations were then recombined to construct a small library. Screening of this
library identified the best variant with a 9.2-fold improvement in the yield
towards pyruvate and propionaldehyde, relative to wild-type (WT). Pentanal and
hexanal were used as acceptors to determine stereoselectivities of the reactions,
which were found to be higher than 98% enantiomeric excess (ee) for the S
configuration. Three variants were identified to be active for the reaction
between pyruvate and 3-FBA. The best variant was able to convert 47% of substrate
into product within 24 h, whereas no conversion was observed for WT. Docking
experiments suggested a cooperation between the mutations responsible for donor
and acceptor recognition, which would promote the activity towards both the
acceptor and donor. The variants obtained have the potential to be used for
developing catalytic pathways to a diverse range of high-value products.

© 2019 Federation of European Biochemical Societies.

DOI: 10.1111/febs.15108 
PMID: 31647171  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

