
1. Afr Health Sci. 2019 Jun;19(2):2082-2090. doi: 10.4314/ahs.v19i2.32.

Seroprevalence and determinants of Helicobacter pylori infection among
asymptomatic under-five children at a Tertiary Hospital in the South-Western
region of Nigeria.

Babatola AO(1), Akinbami FO(2), Adeodu OO(3), Ojo TO(4), Efere MO(5), Olatunya
OS(6).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Paediatrics, Ekiti State University, Ado- Ekiti, Ekiti State.
mamafunky@yahoo.co.uk.
(2)Department of Paediatrics, Niger Delta University, Wilberforce Island,
Amassoma, Bayelsa State kaytoks@yahoo.com.
(3)Department of Paediatrics and Child Health, Obafemi Awolowo University
Teaching Hospitals Complex, Ile-Ife/Obafemi Awolowo University, Ile-Ife, Osun
State oadeodu2@yahoo.co.uk.
(4)Department of Community Health, Obafemi Awolowo University Teaching Hospitals 
Complex, Ile-Ife linktopeojo@yahoo.com.
(5)Department of Biochemistry, Obafemi Awolowo University, Ile-Ife, Osun State.
efereo@yahoo.com.
(6)Department of Paediatrics, Ekiti State University, Ado- Ekiti, Ekiti State
ladeletunya@yahoo.com.

Background: The epidemiology of Helicobacter pylori (H. pylori) infection among
under-five children in the South West Nigeria remains largely understudied. There
is no data on the subject from the study area.
Objectives: This study was conducted to assess the seroprevalence of H. pylori
infection among under-five children at a tertiary hospital in the South Western, 
Nigeria and to determine its associated socio-demographic factors.
Methods: Sera of 360 children were analyzed for anti H. pylori Ig G using enzyme 
linked immunosorbent assay test kit (BQ ELISA Ig G KIT) and H. pylori infection
risk factors were determined. Determinants of H. pylori infection was determined 
using binary logistic regression analysis and p-values < 0.05 were taken as
statistically significant.
Results: H. pylori infection seroprevalence rate was 32.8% and increased with
age. Living in one room accommodation, large families, playing with soil, family 
history of dyspepsia, practice of premastication, sharing of plates and cutlery, 
and water closet toilet were associated with H. pylori Ig G seropositivity
(p<0.05) on binary regression analysis.
Conclusion: The seroprevalence of H. pylori infection in under -five children is 
high, increasing as the age of the children increased. This may suggest that
instituting preventive measures at young age, targeting identified factors may be
effective in reducing the burden of H. pylori infection.

© 2019 Babatola et al.

DOI: 10.4314/ahs.v19i2.32 
PMCID: PMC6794498
PMID: 31656492  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

