
1. Biosci Trends. 2019 Nov 13;13(5):411-422. doi: 10.5582/bst.2019.01191. Epub 2019 
Oct 25.

Overexpression of anti-fibrotic factors ameliorates anti-fibrotic properties of
Wharton's jelly derived mesenchymal stem cells under oxidative damage.

Nimsanor N(1), Phetfong J(2), Kitiyanant N(3), Kamprom W(4), Supokawej A(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Clinical Microscopy, Faculty of Medical Technology, Mahidol
University, Salaya, Nakhon Pathom, Thailand.
(2)Center for Research and Innovation, Faculty of Medical Technology, Mahidol
University, Salaya, Nakhon Pathom, Thailand.
(3)Stem Cell Research Group, Institute of Molecular Biosciences, Mahidol
University, Salaya, Nakhon Pathom, Thailand.
(4)Department of Clinical Microbiology and Applied Technology, Faculty of Medical
Technology, Mahidol University, Salaya, Nakhon Pathom, Thailand.

Transplantation with Wharton's jelly derived mesenchymal stem cells (WJ-MSCs)
showed great benefits for restoring myocardial function. However, the outcome of 
WJ-MSCs transplantation was unsuccessful due to multiple factors including
oxidative damage. The presence of oxidative stress due to myocardium injury
influences fibrous tissue formation, which causes disability of cardiac muscle.
Hepatocyte growth factor (HGF), insulin-like growth factor (IGF1), and sonic
hedgehog (SHH) are well-known master regulators in anti-fibrosis when secreted by
WJ-MSCs. They showed a beneficial role in the recovery of cardiac fibrosis after 
WJ-MSCs transplantation. This study hypothesizes whether the reduction of the
anti-fibrosis property in WJ-MSCs from oxidative damage can be recovered by
overexpression of the HGF, IGF1, or SHH gene. Overexpression was attained by
transfection of WJ-MSCs with pCMV3-HGF, pCMV3-IGF1, or pCMV3-SHH followed by H2O2
exposure and co-culturing with cardiac fibroblasts. Myofibroblast specific
markers comprised of alpha-smooth muscle actin (α-SMA) and collagen type 1 (COL1)
were evaluated. The WJ-MSCs treated with H2O2 influenced the expression of
myofibroblastic markers, whereas the overexpression of HGF, IGF1 or SHH reduced
myofibroblastic formation. These results indicate that the oxidative stress
impaired anti-fibrotic property of WJ-MSCs, leads to an increase of
myofibroblasts. Overexpression of anti-fibrotic genes restored the endogenous
HGF, IGF1, and SHH alleviating improvement of cardiac function.

DOI: 10.5582/bst.2019.01191 
PMID: 31656260  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

