
1. J Infect Dis. 2020 Mar 2;221(6):989-999. doi: 10.1093/infdis/jiz541.

Nicotinamide Limits Replication of Mycobacterium tuberculosis and Bacille
Calmette-Guérin Within Macrophages.

Simmons JD(1), Peterson GJ(1), Campo M(1), Lohmiller J(2), Skerrett SJ(3), Tunaru
S(4), Offermanns S(4), Sherman DR(2)(5), Hawn TR(1).

Author information: 
(1)TB Research & Training Center, Department of Medicine, University of
Washington, Seattle, Washington, USA.
(2)Center for Global Infectious Disease Research, Seattle Children's Research
Institute, Seattle, Washington, USA.
(3)Division of Pulmonary, Critical Care and Sleep Medicine, Department of
Medicine, University of Washington, Seattle, Washington, USA.
(4)Department of Pharmacology, Max Planck Institute for Heart and Lung Research, 
Bad Nauheim, Germany.
(5)Department of Microbiology, University of Washington, Seattle, Washington,
USA.

Novel antimicrobials for treatment of Mycobacterium tuberculosis are needed. We
hypothesized that nicotinamide (NAM) and nicotinic acid (NA) modulate macrophage 
function to restrict M. tuberculosis replication in addition to their direct
antimicrobial properties. Both compounds had modest activity in 7H9 broth, but
only NAM inhibited replication in macrophages. Surprisingly, in macrophages NAM
and the related compound pyrazinamide restricted growth of bacille
Calmette-Guérin but not wild-type Mycobacterium bovis, which both lack a
functional nicotinamidase/pyrazinamidase (PncA) rendering each strain resistant
to these drugs in broth culture. Interestingly, NAM was not active in macrophages
infected with a virulent M. tuberculosis mutant encoding a deletion in pncA. We
conclude that the differential activity of NAM and nicotinic acid on infected
macrophages suggests host-specific NAM targets rather than PncA-dependent direct 
antimicrobial properties. These activities are sufficient to restrict attenuated 
BCG, but not virulent wild-type M. bovis or M. tuberculosis.

© The Author(s) 2019. Published by Oxford University Press for the Infectious
Diseases Society of America.

DOI: 10.1093/infdis/jiz541 
PMCID: PMC7050990
PMID: 31665359  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

