
1. Front Microbiol. 2019 Oct 22;10:2325. doi: 10.3389/fmicb.2019.02325. eCollection 
2019.

The Therapeutic Effect of 1,8-Cineol on Pathogenic Bacteria Species Present in
Chronic Rhinosinusitis.

Schürmann M(1), Oppel F(1), Gottschalk M(2), Büker B(2), Jantos CA(3), Knabbe
C(4), Hütten A(2), Kaltschmidt B(5), Kaltschmidt C(6), Sudhoff H(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Otolaryngology, Head and Neck Surgery, Klinikum Bielefeld,
Bielefeld, Germany.
(2)Thin Films and Physics of Nanostructures, Faculty of Physics, Bielefeld
University, Bielefeld, Germany.
(3)Institute of Laboratory Medicine and Microbiology, Bielefeld, Germany.
(4)Institute for Laboratory and Transfusion Medicine, Heart and Diabetes Center
North Rhine-Westphalia, Bad Oeynhausen, Germany.
(5)Molecular Neurobiology, Faculty of Biology, Bielefeld University, Bielefeld,
Germany.
(6)Department of Cell Biology, Faculty of Biology, Bielefeld University,
Bielefeld, Germany.

Chronic rhinosinusitis (CRS) is marked by an inflamed mucosa of sinuses and is
accompanied by a significantly reduced quality of live. Since no guidelines for
the treatment of CRS are available, long lasting clinical histories with health
care costs adding up to dozens of billion $ annually are caused by CRS. The
progression of CRS is often induced by bacterial infections and/or a shift in
microbiome as well as biofilm formation. The exact microbiome alterations are
still unclear and the impenetrable biofilm renders the treatment with common
antibiotics ineffective. This study focuses on characterizing the microbiome
changes in CRS and investigating the inhibition of biofilm growth by 1,8-Cineol, 
a small, non-polar and hence biofilm penetrating molecule with known
antimicrobial potential. We performed MALDI-TOF MS based characterization of the 
microbiomes of healthy individuals and CRS patients (n = 50). The microbiome in
our test group was shifted to pathogens (Staphylococcus aureus, Escherichia coli,
and Moraxella catarrhalis). In contrast to published studies, solely based on
cell culture techniques, we could not verify the abundance of Pseudomonas
aeruginosa in CRS. The inhibition of bacterial proliferation and biofilm growth
by 1,8-Cineol was measured for these three pathogens. Interestingly, S. aureus,
the most prominent germ in CRS, showed a biofilm inhibition not simply correlated
to its inhibition of proliferation. RT-qPCR confirmed that this was due to the
downregulations of major key players in biofilm generation (agrA, SarA and σB) by
1,8-Cineol. Furthermore we verified this high biofilm inhibition potential in a
model host system consisting out of S. aureus biofilm grown on mature respiratory
epithelium. A second host model, comprising organotypic slices, was utilized to
investigate the reaction of the innate immune system present in the nasal mucosa 
upon biofilm formation and treatment with 1,8-Cineol. Interestingly
Staphylococcus epidermidis, the cause of very common catheter infections,
possesses a biofilm generation pathway very similar to S. aureus and might be
treatable in a similar fashion. The two presented in vitro model systems might be
transferred to combinations of every biofilm forming bacterial with most kind of 
epithelium and mucosa.

Copyright © 2019 Schürmann, Oppel, Gottschalk, Büker, Jantos, Knabbe, Hütten,
Kaltschmidt, Kaltschmidt and Sudhoff.

DOI: 10.3389/fmicb.2019.02325 
PMCID: PMC6821979
PMID: 31708879 

