
1. Elife. 2019 Nov 12;8. pii: e48309. doi: 10.7554/eLife.48309.

Atypical memory B-cells are associated with Plasmodium falciparum anemia through 
anti-phosphatidylserine antibodies.

Rivera-Correa J(1), Mackroth MS(2)(3)(4), Jacobs T(3)(4), Schulze Zur Wiesch
J(2)(4), Rolling T(2)(4)(5), Rodriguez A(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology, New York University School of Medicine, New York, 
United States.
(2)Division of Infectious Diseases, I. Department of Internal Medicine,
University Medical Center Hamburg-Eppendorf, Hamburg, Germany.
(3)Protozoa Immunology, Bernhard Nocht Institute for Tropical Medicine, Hamburg, 
Germany.
(4)German Center for Infection Research (DZIF), Hamburg-Lübeck-Borstel-Riems,
Hamburg, Germany.
(5)Department of Clinical Research, Bernhard Nocht Institute for Tropical
Medicine, Hamburg, Germany.

Anemia is a common complication of malaria that is characterized by the loss of
infected and uninfected erythrocytes. In mouse malaria models, clearance of
uninfected erythrocytes is promoted by autoimmune anti-phosphatidylserine (PS)
antibodies produced by T-bet+B-cells, which bind to exposed PS in erythrocytes,
but the mechanism in patients is still unclear. In Plasmodium falciparum patients
with anemia, we show that atypical memory FcRL5+T-bet+ B-cells are expanded and
associate both with higher levels of anti-PS antibodies in plasma and with the
development of anemia in these patients. No association of anti-PS antibodies or 
anemia with other B-cell subsets and no association of other antibody
specificities with FcRL5+T-bet+ B-cells is observed, revealing high specificity
in this response. We also identify FcRL5+T-bet+ B-cells as producers of anti-PS
antibodies in ex vivo cultures of naïve human peripheral blood mononuclear cells 
(PBMC) stimulated with P.-falciparum-infected erythrocyte lysates. These data
define a crucial role for atypical memory B-cells and anti-PS autoantibodies in
human malarial anemia.

© 2019, Rivera-Correa et al.

DOI: 10.7554/eLife.48309 
PMCID: PMC6853636
PMID: 31713516  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: JR, MM, TJ, JS, TR, AR No competing interests
declared

