
1. Nature. 2019 Nov;575(7783):500-504. doi: 10.1038/s41586-019-1748-4. Epub 2019 Nov
13.

Marine Proteobacteria metabolize glycolate via the β-hydroxyaspartate cycle.

Schada von Borzyskowski L(1), Severi F(2), Krüger K(3), Hermann L(4), Gilardet
A(2), Sippel F(2), Pommerenke B(2), Claus P(2), Cortina NS(2), Glatter T(5),
Zauner S(6), Zarzycki J(2), Fuchs BM(3), Bremer E(4)(7), Maier UG(6)(7), Amann
RI(3), Erb TJ(8)(9).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry & Synthetic Metabolism, Max Planck Institute for
Terrestrial Microbiology, Marburg, Germany. schada@mpi-marburg.mpg.de.
(2)Department of Biochemistry & Synthetic Metabolism, Max Planck Institute for
Terrestrial Microbiology, Marburg, Germany.
(3)Department of Microbial Ecology, Max Planck Institute for Marine Microbiology,
Bremen, Germany.
(4)Laboratory for Molecular Microbiology, Department of Biology,
Philipps-University Marburg, Marburg, Germany.
(5)Facility for Mass Spectrometry and Proteomics, Max Planck Institute for
Terrestrial Microbiology, Marburg, Germany.
(6)Laboratory for Cell Biology, Department of Biology, Philipps-University
Marburg, Marburg, Germany.
(7)LOEWE-Center for Synthetic Microbiology, Philipps-University Marburg, Marburg,
Germany.
(8)Department of Biochemistry & Synthetic Metabolism, Max Planck Institute for
Terrestrial Microbiology, Marburg, Germany. toerb@mpi-marburg.mpg.de.
(9)LOEWE-Center for Synthetic Microbiology, Philipps-University Marburg, Marburg,
Germany. toerb@mpi-marburg.mpg.de.

One of the most abundant sources of organic carbon in the ocean is glycolate, the
secretion of which by marine phytoplankton results in an estimated annual flux of
one petagram of glycolate in marine environments1. Although it is generally
accepted that glycolate is oxidized to glyoxylate by marine bacteria2-4, the
further fate of this C2 metabolite is not well understood. Here we show that
ubiquitous marine Proteobacteria are able to assimilate glyoxylate via the
β-hydroxyaspartate cycle (BHAC) that was originally proposed 56 years ago5. We
elucidate the biochemistry of the BHAC and describe the structure of its key
enzymes, including a previously unknown primary imine reductase. Overall, the
BHAC enables the direct production of oxaloacetate from glyoxylate through only
four enzymatic steps, representing-to our knowledge-the most efficient glyoxylate
assimilation route described to date. Analysis of marine metagenomes shows that
the BHAC is globally distributed and on average 20-fold more abundant than the
glycerate pathway, the only other known pathway for net glyoxylate assimilation. 
In a field study of a phytoplankton bloom, we show that glycolate is present in
high nanomolar concentrations and taken up by prokaryotes at rates that allow a
full turnover of the glycolate pool within one week. During the bloom, genes that
encode BHAC key enzymes are present in up to 1.5% of the bacterial community and 
actively transcribed, supporting the role of the BHAC in glycolate assimilation
and suggesting a previously undescribed trophic interaction between autotrophic
phytoplankton and heterotrophic bacterioplankton.

DOI: 10.1038/s41586-019-1748-4 
PMID: 31723261  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

