
1. Front Microbiol. 2019 Oct 31;10:2466. doi: 10.3389/fmicb.2019.02466. eCollection 
2019.

Exploring the Role of Relish on Antimicrobial Peptide Expressions (AMPs) Upon
Nematode-Bacteria Complex Challenge in the Nipa Palm Hispid Beetle, Octodonta
nipae Maulik (Coleoptera: Chrysomelidae).

Sanda NB(1)(2), Hou B(3), Muhammad A(1), Ali H(1)(4), Hou Y(1).

Author information: 
(1)State Key Laboratory of Ecological Pest Control for Fujian and Taiwan Crops,
Department of Plant Protection, Fujian Agriculture and Forestry University,
Fuzhou, China.
(2)Department of Crop Protection, Faculty of Agriculture, Bayero University Kano,
Kano, Nigeria.
(3)Department of Entomology, College of Plant Protection, Nanjing Agricultural
University, Nanjing, China.
(4)Department of Entomology, University of Agriculture Faisalabad, Okara,
Pakistan.

The humoral immune responses of the nipa palm hispid beetle Octodonta nipae
involves the inducible expression of the genes coding for antimicrobial peptides 
(AMPs) which are mediated by immune deficiency signaling pathways. In insects,
the nuclear factor-κB (NF-κB) transcription factor, Relish, has been shown to
regulate AMP gene expressions upon microbial infections. Here, we dissect the
expression patterns of some AMPs in O. nipae during infections by
entomopathogenic nematodes (EPNs) and their symbionts, before and after Relish
knock down. Our results indicate that, prior to gene silencing, the AMPs attacin 
C1, attacin C2, and defensin 2B were especially expressed to great extents in the
insects challenged with the nematodes Steinernema carpocapsae and Heterorhabditis
bacteriophora as well as with their respective symbionts Xenorhabdus nematophila 
and Photorhabdus luminescens. The study also established the partial sequence of 
OnRelish/NF-κB p110 subunit in O. nipae, with an open reading frame coding for a 
protein with 102 amino acid residues. A typical Death domain-containing protein
was detected (as seen in Drosophila) at the C-terminus of the protein.
Phylogenetic analysis revealed that in O. nipae, Relish is clustered with
registered Relish/NF-κB p110 proteins from other species of insect especially
Leptinotarsa decemlineata from the same order Coleoptera. Injection of OnRelish
dsRNA remarkably brought down the expression of OnRelish and also reduced the
magnitude of transcription of attacin C1 and defensin 2B upon S. carpocapsae and 
H. bacteriophora and their symbionts infections. Altogether, our data unveil the 
expression pattern of OnRelish as well as that of some AMP genes it influences
during immune responses of O. nipae against EPNs and their symbionts.

Copyright © 2019 Sanda, Hou, Muhammad, Ali and Hou.

DOI: 10.3389/fmicb.2019.02466 
PMCID: PMC6834688
PMID: 31736908 

