
1. J Clin Invest. 2020 Jan 2;130(1):94-107. doi: 10.1172/JCI128469.

Apelin directs endothelial cell differentiation and vascular repair following
immune-mediated injury.

Masoud AG(1), Lin J(2)(3), Azad AK(1), Farhan MA(1), Fischer C(4), Zhu LF(2),
Zhang H(1)(5), Sis B(6), Kassiri Z(7), Moore RB(2), Kim D(1), Anderson CC(2)(3), 
Vederas JC(4), Adam BA(6), Oudit GY(1)(5), Murray AG(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine.
(2)Department of Surgery.
(3)Department of Medical Microbiology and Immunology, and.
(4)Department of Chemistry, University of Alberta, Edmonton, Alberta, Canada.
(5)Mazankowski Heart Institute, Edmonton, Alberta, Canada.
(6)Department of Laboratory Medicine and Pathology and.
(7)Department of Physiology, University of Alberta, Edmonton, Alberta, Canada.

Sustained, indolent immune injury of the vasculature of a heart transplant limits
long-term graft and recipient survival. This injury is mitigated by a poorly
characterized, maladaptive repair response. Vascular endothelial cells respond to
proangiogenic cues in the embryo by differentiation to specialized phenotypes,
associated with expression of apelin. In the adult, the role of developmental
proangiogenic cues in repair of the established vasculature is largely unknown.
We found that human and minor histocompatibility-mismatched donor mouse heart
allografts with alloimmune-mediated vasculopathy upregulated expression of apelin
in arteries and myocardial microvessels. In vivo, loss of donor heart expression 
of apelin facilitated graft immune cell infiltration, blunted vascular repair,
and worsened occlusive vasculopathy in mice. In vitro, an apelin receptor agonist
analog elicited endothelial nitric oxide synthase activation to promote
endothelial monolayer wound repair and reduce immune cell adhesion. Thus, apelin 
acted as an autocrine growth cue to sustain vascular repair and mitigate the
effects of immune injury. Treatment with an apelin receptor agonist after
vasculopathy was established markedly reduced progression of arterial occlusion
in mice. Together, these initial data identify proangiogenic apelin as a key
mediator of coronary vascular repair and a pharmacotherapeutic target for
immune-mediated injury of the coronary vasculature.

DOI: 10.1172/JCI128469 
PMCID: PMC6934203
PMID: 31738185  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

