
1. Indian J Med Microbiol. 2019 Apr-Jun;37(2):198-202. doi:
10.4103/ijmm.IJMM_19_300.

An emerging threat of ceftriaxone-resistant non-typhoidal salmonella in South
India: Incidence and molecular profile.

Pragasam AK(1), Anandan S(1), John J(1), Neeravi A(1), Narasimman V(1),
Muthuirulandi Sethuvel DP(1), Elangovan D(1), Veeraraghavan B(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Clinical Microbiology, Christian Medical College and Hospital,
Vellore, Tamil Nadu, India.

Background: Non-typhoidal Salmonella (NTS) infection is a serious public health
problem globally. Although NTS infections are self-limited, antimicrobial therapy
is recommended for severe infections and immunocompromised patients.
Antimicrobial resistance (AMR) in these pathogens further limits its therapeutic 
options. Here, we report an incidence of ceftriaxone resistance in NTS over the
past 9 years in a southern Indian region.
Materials and Methods: Molecular mechanisms of resistance in
ceftriaxone-resistant NTS have been tested by both phenotypic and molecular
methods. Minimum inhibitory concentration was determined by the E-test and broth 
microdilution method. AMR gene markers of β-lactamases such as AmpCs (blaMOX,
blaCMY, blaDHA, blaFOX, blaACC and blaACT) and extended-spectrum β-lactamases
(ESBLs) (blaSHV, blaTEM, blaVEB, blaPER, blaCTXM-1like,blaCTXM-2like,
blaCTXM-8like, blaCTXM-9like and blaCTXM-25like) were screened. The presence of
IncH12 and IncI1 plasmid was also analysed.
Results: The study reports a 5% prevalence of ceftriaxone resistance in NTS. The 
most common serogroup was Salmonella Group B followed by Salmonella Group E and
Salmonella group C1/C2. The occurrence of blaCTX-M-1, blaTEM, blaCMY and blaSHV
genes was observed in 54%, 54%, 48% and 3% of the isolates, respectively.
Interestingly, few isolates carried dual resistance genes (ESBLs and AmpCs).
IncH12 and IncI1 plasmid was identified in isolates carrying ESBL and AmpC genes,
respectively.
Conclusion: This study shows that ceftriaxone resistance is mainly mediated by
β-lactamases such as ESBL and AmpC. As the incidence of ceftriaxone resistance is
rising gradually over the years, it is imperative to monitor the AMR in this
species.

DOI: 10.4103/ijmm.IJMM_19_300 
PMID: 31745019  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: None

