
1. Curr Protoc Immunol. 2019 Dec;127(1):e90. doi: 10.1002/cpim.90.

Characterization of Human Mucosal-associated Invariant T (MAIT) Cells.

Souter MNT(1)(2), Loh L(1), Li S(1)(2), Meehan BS(1), Gherardin NA(1)(2), Godfrey
DI(1)(2), Rossjohn J(3)(4)(5), Fairlie DP(6)(7), Kedzierska K(1), Pellicci
DG(1)(8), Chen Z(1), Kjer-Nielsen L(1), Corbett AJ(1), McCluskey J(1), Eckle
SBG(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, Peter Doherty Institute for
Infection and Immunity, University of Melbourne, Melbourne, Australia.
(2)Australian Research Council Centre of Excellence in Advanced Molecular
Imaging, University of Melbourne, Parkville, Australia.
(3)Infection and Immunity Program and Department of Biochemistry and Molecular
Biology, Biomedicine Discovery Institute, Monash University, Clayton, Australia.
(4)Australian Research Council Centre of Excellence in Advanced Molecular
Imaging, Monash University, Clayton, Australia.
(5)Institute of Infection and Immunity, Cardiff University School of Medicine,
Heath Park, Wales, United Kingdom.
(6)Division of Chemistry and Structural Biology, Institute for Molecular
Bioscience, University of Queensland, Brisbane, Australia.
(7)Australian Research Council Centre of Excellence in Advanced Molecular
Imaging, University of Queensland, Brisbane, Australia.
(8)Murdoch Children's Research Institute, Parkville, Australia.

Mucosal-associated invariant T (MAIT) cells are a subset of unconventional T
cells restricted by the major histocompatibility complex (MHC) class I-like
molecule MHC-related protein 1 (MR1). MAIT cells are found throughout the body,
especially in human blood and liver. Unlike conventional T cells, which are
stimulated by peptide antigens presented by MHC molecules, MAIT cells recognize
metabolite antigens derived from an intermediate in the microbial biosynthesis of
riboflavin. MAIT cells mediate protective immunity to infections by
riboflavin-producing microbes via the production of cytokines and cytotoxicity.
The discovery of stimulating MAIT cell antigens allowed for the development of an
analytical tool, the MR1 tetramer, that binds specifically to the MAIT T cell
receptor (TCR) and is becoming the gold standard for identification of MAIT cells
by flow cytometry. This article describes protocols to characterize the phenotype
of human MAIT cells in blood and tissues by flow cytometry using fluorescently
labeled human MR1 tetramers alongside antibodies specific for MAIT cell markers. 
© 2019 by John Wiley & Sons, Inc. The main protocols include: Basic Protocol 1:
Determining the frequency and steady-state surface phenotype of human MAIT cells 
Basic Protocol 2: Determining the activation phenotype of human MAIT cells in
blood Basic Protocol 3: Characterizing MAIT cell TCRs using TCR-positive reporter
cell lines Alternate protocols are provided for determining the absolute number, 
transcription factor phenotype, and TCR usage of human MAIT cells; and
determining activation phenotype by staining for intracellular markers, measuring
secreted cytokines, and measuring fluorescent dye dilution due to proliferation. 
Additional methods are provided for determining the capacity of MAIT cells to
produce cytokine independently of antigen using plate-bound or bead-immobilized
CD3/CD28 stimulation; and determining the MR1-Ag dependence of MAIT cell
activation using MR1-blocking antibody or competitive inhibition. For
TCR-positive reporter cell lines, methods are also provided for evaluating the
MAIT TCR-mediated MR1-Ag response, determining the capacity of the reporter lines
to produce cytokine independently of antigen, determining the MR1-Ag dependence
of the reporter lines, and evaluating the MR1-Ag response of the reporter lines
using IL-2 secretion. Support Protocols describe the preparation of PBMCs from
human blood, the preparation of single-cell suspensions from tissue, the
isolation of MAIT cells by FACS and MACS, cloning MAIT TCRα and β chain genes and
MR1 genes for transduction, generating stably and transiently transfected cells
lines, generating a stable MR1 knockout antigen-presenting cell line, and
generating monocyte-derived dendritic cells.

© 2019 John Wiley & Sons, Inc.

DOI: 10.1002/cpim.90 
PMID: 31763790  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

