
1. Int J Antimicrob Agents. 2020 Feb;55(2):105857. doi:
10.1016/j.ijantimicag.2019.11.014. Epub 2019 Nov 27.

LMB-1 producing Citrobacter freundii from Argentina, a novel player in the field 
of MBLs.

Dabos L(1), Rodriguez CH(2), Nastro M(2), Dortet L(3), Bonnin RA(4), Famiglietti 
A(2), Iorga BI(5), Vay C(2), Naas T(6).

Author information: 
(1)EA7361 "Structure, dynamic, function and expression of broad spectrum
β-lactamases", Paris-Sud University, Faculty of Medicine, Le Kremlin-Bicêtre,
France; Joint research Unit EERA « Evolution and Ecology of Resistance to
Antibiotics », Institut Pasteur-APHP-University Paris Sud, Paris, France.
(2)Departamento de Bioquímica Clinica, Hospital de Clínicas José de San Martín,
Facultad de Farmacia y Bioquímica, Universidad de Buenos Aires, Buenos Aires,
Argentina.
(3)EA7361 "Structure, dynamic, function and expression of broad spectrum
β-lactamases", Paris-Sud University, Faculty of Medicine, Le Kremlin-Bicêtre,
France; Joint research Unit EERA « Evolution and Ecology of Resistance to
Antibiotics », Institut Pasteur-APHP-University Paris Sud, Paris, France;
Department of Bacteriology-Hygiene, Bicêtre Hospital, APHP, Le Kremlin-Bicêtre,
France; French National Reference Center for Antibiotic Resistance, Le
Kremlin-Bicêtre, France.
(4)EA7361 "Structure, dynamic, function and expression of broad spectrum
β-lactamases", Paris-Sud University, Faculty of Medicine, Le Kremlin-Bicêtre,
France; Joint research Unit EERA « Evolution and Ecology of Resistance to
Antibiotics », Institut Pasteur-APHP-University Paris Sud, Paris, France; French 
National Reference Center for Antibiotic Resistance, Le Kremlin-Bicêtre, France.
(5)Université Paris-Saclay, CNRS, Institut de Chimie des Substances Naturelles,
UPR 2301, Labex LERMIT, 91198, Gif-sur-Yvette, France.
(6)EA7361 "Structure, dynamic, function and expression of broad spectrum
β-lactamases", Paris-Sud University, Faculty of Medicine, Le Kremlin-Bicêtre,
France; Joint research Unit EERA « Evolution and Ecology of Resistance to
Antibiotics », Institut Pasteur-APHP-University Paris Sud, Paris, France;
Department of Bacteriology-Hygiene, Bicêtre Hospital, APHP, Le Kremlin-Bicêtre,
France; French National Reference Center for Antibiotic Resistance, Le
Kremlin-Bicêtre, France. Electronic address: thierry.naas@aphp.fr.

Carbapenemase-producing Enterobacterales expressing OXA-48, KPC, NDM, VIM or IMP 
enzymes are increasingly reported worldwide. We have characterized LMB-1, a novel
metallo-β-lactamase (MBL) of Ambler class B3 from Citrobacter freundii 164
(Cf164) clinical isolate from Buenos Aires, Argentina. Cf164 displayed reduced
susceptibility to carbapenems but gave inconsistent results with carbapenemase
confirmatory tests, indicating the presence of a weak carbapenemase. Analysis of 
whole-genome sequencing (WGS) of Cf164 using Resfinder revealed four β-lactamase 
genes coding for CTX-M-8, PER-2, TEM-1 and CMY-150, a novel chromosomally-encoded
CMY variant. Kinetic parameters of purified CMY-150 did not reveal any
carbapenemase activity. However, CMY-150 conferred higher minimum inhibitory
concentrations (MICs) to E. coli for ceftazidime and aztreonam compared with
CMY-2. The in-house-developed β-lactamase search software (ResMiner) in WGS data 
revealed a novel subclass B3 MBL named LMB-1. LMB-1 conferred resistance to
penicillins and expanded-spectrum cephalosporins and reduced susceptibility to
carbapenems in E. coli. The blaLMB-1 gene was located on a 176-kb IncA/C2
plasmid. LMB-1 shared 99% amino acid sequence identity with the MBL encoded in
the chromosome of Rheinheimera pacifica, it's likely progenitor. Despite repeated
attempts, LMB-1 could not be purified, thus only specific activities could
indicate hydrolysis of carbapenems. Here we report on CMY-150, a novel CMY-2
variant that confers increased ceftazidime and aztreonam MICs to E. coli and the 
first description of LMB-1 in Argentina. This work underlines the need for
several carbapenemase-producing Enterobacteriaceae (CPE) confirmatory tests, as
this novel enzyme might have been missed using only one.

Copyright © 2019 Elsevier B.V. and International Society of Chemotherapy. All
rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ijantimicag.2019.11.014 
PMID: 31785341  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

