
1. Malawi Med J. 2018 Dec;30(4):219-224. doi: 10.4314/mmj.v30i4.2.

Efficacy of Pterocarpus angolensis crude extracts against Candida krusei,
Staphylococcus aureus, Streptococcus agalactiae and Escherichia coli.

Chipinga JV(1), Kamanula JF(2), Moyo PBB(3).

Author information: 
(1)Malawi Adventist University, Malamulo College of Health Sciences, P.O. Box 55,
Makwasa, Malawi.
(2)Mzuzu University, P/Bag 201, Luwinga, Mzuzu.
(3)DDT College of Medicine, Plot 13139-41, BBS Mall.

Background: The medicinal plants used to treat different ailments in Malawi
contain important phytochemicals which have bactericidal and anti-fungal
properties. Pterocarpus angolensis, locally known as mlombwa tree, which is found
in many parts of Malawi, is one such a plant and was studied.
Aims: In vitro analysis of the antimicrobial properties of Pterocarpus angolensis
crude extracts on Staphylococcus aureus, Escherichia coli, Streptococcus
agalactiae, Candida krusei and determination of the phytochemicals there in.
Methods: In this study, different organs of P. angolensis, a medicinal plant
which is locally used to treat skin diseases, were qualitatively screened for the
presence of phytochemical constituents and quantitatively assayed for the
antimicrobial activity to ascertain their pharmaceutical potential. The aqueous, 
dichloromethane and methanolic extracts of the leaves, stem-bark, fruits and
roots of the plant were tested against Escherichia coli, Staphylococcus aureus,
Streptococcus agalactiae and Candida krusei by the macro tube dilution method.
These pathogens were selected due to their significant contribution to infectious
disease burden of most hospitals and also the fact that of late, they have shown 
signs of resistance to conventional antibiotics.
Results: The study revealed that P. angolensis contained tannins, flavonoids,
saponins and terpenoids. All the extracts exhibited some antimicrobial activity
against the test organisms. However, the activity of the extracts depended on
concentration and microbial species. The minimum inhibition concentration (MIC)
values of the extracts ranged from 0.166 g/ml to 0.01046 g/ml with the
dichloromethane and methanolic extracts exhibiting more activity than the aqueous
extracts. The minimum bactericidal concentration and minimum fungicidal
concentration (MBC and MFC respectively) values of the extracts ranged from 0.166
g/ml to 0.0417 g/ml.
Conclusion: The results obtained indicate that Pterocarpus angolensis has both
antibacterial and antifungal properties and could be used for the treatment of
Taenia capitis (ring worm) and other ailments. Use of the isolated and purified
compounds from P. angolensis could increase the susceptibility of the tested
pathogenic microorganisms in this study.

© 2018 The College of Medicine and the Medical Association of Malawi.

DOI: 10.4314/mmj.v30i4.2 
PMCID: PMC6863416
PMID: 31798798  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

