
1. PLoS Pathog. 2019 Dec 2;15(12):e1008207. doi: 10.1371/journal.ppat.1008207.
eCollection 2019 Dec.

Dissemination of Chlamydia from the reproductive tract to the gastro-intestinal
tract occurs in stages and relies on Chlamydia transport by host cells.

Howe SE(1), Shillova N(1), Konjufca V(1).

Author information: 
(1)School of Biological Sciences, Microbiology Program, Southern Illinois
University, Carbondale, Illinois, United States of America.

Chlamydia trachomatis is a Gram-negative bacterial pathogen and a major cause of 
sexually transmitted disease and preventable blindness. In women, infections with
C. trachomatis may lead to pelvic inflammatory disease (PID), ectopic pregnancy, 
chronic pelvic pain, and infertility. In addition to infecting the female
reproductive tract (FRT), Chlamydia spp. are routinely found in the
gastro-intestinal (GI) tract of animals and humans and can be a reservoir for
reinfection of the FRT. Whether Chlamydia disseminates from the FRT to the GI
tract via internal routes remains unknown. Using mouse-specific C. muridarum as a
model pathogen we show that Chlamydia disseminates from the FRT to the GI tract
in a stepwise manner, by first infecting the FRT-draining iliac lymph nodes
(ILNs), then the spleen, then the GI tract. Tissue CD11c+ DCs mediate the first
step: FRT to ILN Chlamydia transport, which relies on CCR7:CCL21/CCL19 signaling.
The second step, Chlamydia transport from ILN to the spleen, also relies on cell 
transport. However, this step is dependent on cell migration mediated by
sphingosine 1-phosphate (S1P) signaling. Finally, spleen to GI tract Chlamydia
spread is the third critical step, and is significantly hindered in
splenectomized mice. Inhibition of Chlamydia dissemination significantly reduces 
or precludes the induction of Chlamydia-specific serum IgG antibodies, presence
of which is correlated with FRT pathology in women. This study reveals important 
insights in context of Chlamydia spp. pathogenesis and will inform the
development of therapeutic targets and vaccines to combat this pathogen.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.ppat.1008207 
PMCID: PMC6907867
PMID: 31790512  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have declared that no competing
interests exist.

