
1. Phytopathology. 2020 Apr;110(4):822-833. doi: 10.1094/PHYTO-06-19-0206-R. Epub
2020 Mar 2.

Genome-Wide Association Study Identifies Single Nucleotide Polymorphism Markers
Associated with Mycelial Growth (at 15, 20, and 25°C), Mefenoxam Resistance, and 
Mating Type in Phytophthora infestans.

Ayala-Usma DA(1)(2), Danies G(3), Myers K(4), Bond MO(4)(5), Romero-Navarro
JA(6), Judelson HS(7), Restrepo S(1), Fry WE(4).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biological Sciences, Universidad de los Andes, Bogotá, Colombia.
(2)Max Planck Tandem Group in Computational Biology, Universidad de los Andes,
Bogotá, Colombia.
(3)Department of Design, Universidad de los Andes, Bogotá, Colombia.
(4)Plant Pathology and Plant-Microbe Biology Section, School of Integrative Plant
Science, Cornell University, Ithaca, NY, U.S.A.
(5)Department of Botany, University of Hawaii, Mānoa, HI, U.S.A.
(6)Plant Breeding and Genetics Section, School of Integrative Plant Science,
Cornell University, Ithaca, NY, U.S.A.
(7)Department of Microbiology and Plant Pathology, University of California,
Riverside, CA, U.S.A.

Phenotypic diversity among individuals defines the potential for evolutionary
selection in a species. Phytophthora infestans epidemics are generally thought to
be favored by moderate to low temperatures, but temperatures in many locations
worldwide are expected to rise as a result of global climate change. Thus, we
investigated variation among individuals of P. infestans for relative growth at
different temperatures. Isolates of P. infestans came from three collections: (i)
individual genotypes recently dominant in the United States, (ii) recently
collected individuals from Central Mexico, and (iii) progeny of a recent sexual
recombination event in the northeastern United States. In general, these isolates
had optimal mycelial growth rates at 15 or 20°C. However, two individuals from
Central Mexico grew better at higher temperatures than did most others and two
individuals grew relatively less at higher temperatures than did most others. The
isolates were also assessed for mefenoxam sensitivity and mating type. Each
collection contained individuals of diverse sensitivities to mefenoxam and
individuals of the A1 and A2 mating type. We then searched for genomic regions
associated with phenotypic diversity using genotyping-by-sequencing. We found one
single nucleotide polymorphism (SNP) associated with variability in mycelial
growth at 20°C, two associated with variability in mycelial growth at 25°C, two
associated with sensitivity to mefenoxam, and one associated with mating type.
Interestingly, the SNPs associated with mefenoxam sensitivity were found in a
gene-sparse region, whereas the SNPs associated with growth at the two
temperatures and mating type were found both at more gene-dense regions.

DOI: 10.1094/PHYTO-06-19-0206-R 
PMID: 31829117  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

