
1. J Bacteriol. 2020 Feb 11;202(5). pii: e00595-19. doi: 10.1128/JB.00595-19. Print 
2020 Feb 11.

Nanomolar Responsiveness of an Anaerobic Degradation Specialist to Alkylphenol
Pollutants.

Vagts J(1), Weiten A(1), Scheve S(1), Kalvelage K(1), Swirski S(2), Wöhlbrand
L(1), Neidhardt J(2)(3), Winklhofer M(4)(3), Rabus R(5).

Author information: 
(1)General and Molecular Microbiology, Institute for Chemistry and Biology of the
Marine Environment (ICBM), Carl von Ossietzky University of Oldenburg, Oldenburg,
Germany.
(2)Human Genetics, Department of Human Medicine, Carl von Ossietzky University of
Oldenburg, Oldenburg, Germany.
(3)Research Center Neurosensory Science, Carl von Ossietzky University of
Oldenburg, Oldenburg, Germany.
(4)Sensory Biology of Animals, Institute of Biology and Environmental Sciences
(IBU), Carl von Ossietzky University of Oldenburg, Oldenburg, Germany.
(5)General and Molecular Microbiology, Institute for Chemistry and Biology of the
Marine Environment (ICBM), Carl von Ossietzky University of Oldenburg, Oldenburg,
Germany rabus@icbm.de.

Anaerobic degradation of p-cresol (4-methylphenol) by the denitrifying
betaproteobacterium Aromatoleum aromaticum EbN1 is regulated with high substrate 
specificity, presumed to be mediated by the predicted σ54-dependent two-component
system PcrSR. An unmarked, in-frame ΔpcrSR deletion mutant showed reduced
expression of the genes cmh (21-fold) and hbd (8-fold) that encode the two
enzymes for initial oxidation of p-cresol to p-hydroxybenzoate compared to their 
expression in the wild type. The expression of cmh and hbd was restored by in
trans complementation with pcrSR in the ΔpcrSR background to even higher levels
than in the wild type. This is likely due to ∼200-/∼30-fold more transcripts of
pcrSR in the complemented mutant. The in vivo responsiveness of A. aromaticum
EbN1 to p-cresol was studied in benzoate-limited anaerobic cultures by the
addition of p-cresol at various concentrations (from 100 μM down to 0.1 nM).
Time-resolved transcript profiling by quantitative reverse transcription-PCR
(qRT-PCR) revealed that the lowest p-cresol concentrations just affording cmh and
hbd expression (response threshold) ranged between 1 and 10 nM, which is even
more sensitive than the respective odor receptors of insects. A similar response 
threshold was determined for another alkylphenol, p-ethylphenol, which strain
EbN1 anaerobically degrades via a different route and senses by the σ54-dependent
one-component system EtpR. Based on these data and theoretical considerations,
p-cresol or p-ethylphenol added as a single pulse (10 nM) requires less than a
fraction of a second to reach equilibrium between intra- and extracellular space 
(∼20 molecules per cell), with an estimated Kd (dissociation constant) of <100 nM
alkylphenol (p-cresol or p-ethylphenol) for its respective sensory protein (PcrS 
or EtpR).IMPORTANCE Alkylphenols (like p-cresol and p-ethylphenol) represent bulk
chemicals for industrial syntheses. Besides massive local damage events,
large-scale micropollution is likewise of environmental and health concern. Next 
to understanding how such pollutants can be degraded by microorganisms, it is
also relevant to determine the microorganisms' lower threshold of responsiveness.
Aromatoleum aromaticum EbN1 is a specialist in anaerobic degradation of aromatic 
compounds, employing a complex and substrate-specifically regulated catabolic
network. The present study aims at verifying the predicted role of the PcrSR
system in sensing p-cresol and at determining the threshold of responsiveness for
alkylphenols. The findings have implications for the enigmatic persistence of
dissolved organic matter (escape from biodegradation) and for the lower limits of
aromatic compounds required for bacterial growth.

Copyright © 2020 American Society for Microbiology.

DOI: 10.1128/JB.00595-19 
PMCID: PMC7015708
PMID: 31843798  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

