
1. Front Immunol. 2019 Nov 26;10:2742. doi: 10.3389/fimmu.2019.02742. eCollection
2019.

Flow Cytometry Contributions for the Diagnosis and Immunopathological
Characterization of Primary Immunodeficiency Diseases With Immune Dysregulation.

Cabral-Marques O(1), Schimke LF(2), de Oliveira EB Jr(3), El Khawanky N(4)(5),
Ramos RN(6), Al-Ramadi BK(7), Segundo GRS(8), Ochs HD(9), Condino-Neto A(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Immunology, Institute of Biomedical Sciences, University of São 
Paulo, São Paulo, Brazil.
(2)Department of Rheumatology and Clinical Immunology, Faculty of Medicine,
Center for Chronic Immunodeficiency (CCI), Medical Center-University of Freiburg,
University of Freiburg, Freiburg im Breisgau, Germany.
(3)Immunogenic Inc., São Paulo, Brazil.
(4)Department of Hematology, Oncology and Stem Cell Transplantation, Freiburg
University Medical Center, Freiburg im Breisgau, Germany.
(5)Precision Medicine Theme, The South Australian Health and Medical Research
Institute (SAHMRI), Adelaide, SA, Australia.
(6)INSERM U932, SiRIC Translational Immunotherapy Team, Institut Curie, Paris
Sciences et Lettres Research University, Paris, France.
(7)Department of Medical Microbiology and Immunology, College of Medicine and
Health Sciences, UAE University, Al Ain, United Arab Emirates.
(8)Department of Pediatrics, Federal University of Uberlandia Medical School,
Uberlândia, Brazil.
(9)Department of Pediatrics, University of Washington School of Medicine, and
Seattle Children's Research Institute, Seattle, WA, United States.

Almost 70 years after establishing the concept of primary immunodeficiency
disorders (PIDs), more than 320 monogenic inborn errors of immunity have been
identified thanks to the remarkable contribution of high-throughput genetic
screening in the last decade. Approximately 40 of these PIDs present with
autoimmune or auto-inflammatory symptoms as the primary clinical manifestation
instead of infections. These PIDs are now recognized as diseases of immune
dysregulation. Loss-of function mutations in genes such as FOXP3, CD25, LRBA,
IL-10, IL10RA, and IL10RB, as well as heterozygous gain-of-function mutations in 
JAK1 and STAT3 have been reported as causative of these disorders. Identifying
these syndromes has considerably contributed to expanding our knowledge on the
mechanisms of immune regulation and tolerance. Although whole exome and whole
genome sequencing have been extremely useful in identifying novel causative genes
underlying new phenotypes, these approaches are time-consuming and expensive.
Patients with monogenic syndromes associated with autoimmunity require faster
diagnostic tools to delineate therapeutic strategies and avoid organ damage.
Since these PIDs present with severe life-threatening phenotypes, the need for a 
precise diagnosis in order to initiate appropriate patient management is
necessary. More traditional approaches such as flow cytometry are therefore a
valid option. Here, we review the application of flow cytometry and discuss the
relevance of this powerful technique in diagnosing patients with PIDs presenting 
with immune dysregulation. In addition, flow cytometry represents a fast, robust,
and sensitive approach that efficiently uncovers new immunopathological
mechanisms underlying monogenic PIDs.

Copyright © 2019 Cabral-Marques, Schimke, de Oliveira, El Khawanky, Ramos,
Al-Ramadi, Segundo, Ochs and Condino-Neto.

DOI: 10.3389/fimmu.2019.02742 
PMCID: PMC6889851
PMID: 31849949  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

