
1. Indian J Dent Res. 2019 Sep-Oct;30(5):755-762. doi: 10.4103/ijdr.IJDR_186_17.

Role of angiogenesis in oral submucous fibrosis using vascular endothelial growth
factor and CD34: An immunohistochemical study.

Sharma E(1), Tyagi N(1), Gupta V(1), Narwal A(2), Vij H(3), Lakhnotra D(4).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Oral Pathology and Microbiology, Institute of Dental Studies and
Technologies College, Modinagar, Uttar Pradesh, India.
(2)Department of Oral Pathology, Post Graduate Institute of Dental Sciences,
Rohtak, Haryana, India.
(3)Department of Diagnostic Sciences and Oral Biology, Division of Oral
Pathology, King Khalid University, Abha, Kingdom of Saudi Arabia.
(4)Dental Surgeon, Institute of Dental Sciences, Jammu, Jammu and Kashmir, India.

Background: Oral submucous fibrosis (OSF) is an insidious, chronic, disabling
disease, in which there is lack of perfusion due to reduced level of the
vasculature and this is said to be responsible for the epithelial atrophy seen in
OSF. The degree of vasculature of the affected mucosa and its effects on the
epithelial thickness remains controversial till date.
Aims: This study attempts to analyze the role of angiogenesis in OSF and its
progression using vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF) and CD34 markers.
Materials and Methods: The study samples for the present study comprised of 10
cases each of early OSF, moderately advanced, advanced OSF, and 10 cases of
normal oral mucosa were used as controls. All the cases were subjected to
immunohistochemical staining with VEGF and CD34 markers.
Results: Among the different grades of OSF, we did not find any noticeable
difference in VEGF expression although we found a upregulation in microvessel
density (CD34) in early and moderately advanced OSF followed by a downregulation 
in advanced OSF.
Conclusions: As the disease progresses, there is an increased production of the
extracellular matrix component (collagen I and II and fibronectin) and results in
fibrosis. Subsequently, it leads to the reduction in the level of corium
vascularity and results in hypoxia which ultimately causes reduction and
constriction of the vascular channels. This sequence of events alerts us to the
relevance of early disease diagnosis and management in an irreversible pathology 
such as OSF.

DOI: 10.4103/ijdr.IJDR_186_17 
PMID: 31854369  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: None

