
1. Zoonoses Public Health. 2020 May;67(3):251-262. doi: 10.1111/zph.12680. Epub 2019
Dec 22.

Whole-genome sequencing reveals resistome of highly drug-resistant retail meat
and human Salmonella Dublin.

Eyler AB(1), M'ikanatha NM(2), Xiaoli L(3), Dudley EG(1)(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Food Science, The Pennsylvania State University, University
Park, PA, USA.
(2)Pennsylvania Department of Health, Harrisburg, PA, USA.
(3)E. coli Reference Center, The Pennsylvania State University, University Park, 
PA, USA.

Non-typhoidal Salmonella (NTS) are a significant source of foodborne illness
worldwide, with disease symptoms most often presenting as self-limiting
gastroenteritis; however, occasionally the infection spreads and becomes
invasive, frequently requiring anti-microbial treatment. The cattle-adapted
Dublin serovar of NTS has commonly been associated with invasive illness and
anti-microbial resistance (AMR). Here, the enhanced resolution conferred by
whole-genome sequencing was utilized to elucidate and compare the resistome and
genetic relatedness of 14 multidrug-resistant (MDR) and one pan-susceptible S.
Dublin, isolated primarily in Pennsylvania, from fresh retail meat (one isolate) 
and humans (14 isolates). Twelve different genetic AMR determinants, including
both acquired and chromosomal, were identified. Furthermore, comparative plasmid 
analysis indicated that AMR was primarily conferred by a putative IncA/C2
plasmid. A single pan-susceptible S. Dublin isolate, collected from the same
timeframe and geographical region as the MDR isolates, did not carry an IncA/C2
replicon sequence within its genome. Moreover, the pan-susceptible isolate was
genetically distinct from its MDR counterparts, as it was separated by ≥267
single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs), whereas there was a ≤38 SNP distance
between the MDR isolates. Collectively, this data set advances our understanding 
of the genetic basis of the highly drug-resistant nature of S. Dublin, a serovar 
with significant public health implications.

© 2019 Blackwell Verlag GmbH.

DOI: 10.1111/zph.12680 
PMID: 31867871  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

