
1. J Physiol Pharmacol. 2019 Oct;70(5). doi: 10.26402/jpp.2019.5.08. Epub 2019 Dec
26.

Involvement of epithelial-mesenchymal transition-inducing transcription factors
in the mechanism of Helicobacter pylori-induced fibroblasts activation.

Krzysiek-Maczka G(1), Targosz A(2), Szczyrk U(2), Strzalka M(2), Brzozowski T(2),
Ptak-Belowska A(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Physiology, Faculty of Medicine, Jagiellonian University Medical
College, Cracow, Poland. gracjana.krzysiek-maczka@uj.edu.pl.
(2)Department of Physiology, Faculty of Medicine, Jagiellonian University Medical
College, Cracow, Poland.

Gastric cancer (GC) originating from the lining of the stomach is one of the most
frequent malignancies in humans. The most efficient method giving hope of full
recovery from GC is gastric resection combined with adjuvant chemotherapy and
radiotherapy. However, over 50% of patients after treatment suffer from
recurrence and peritoneal metastasis. The bacteria Helicobacter pylori (Hp) is
nowadays considered as the major pathogen capable of colonizing gastric mucosa.
This bug causes deregulation of multiple signaling pathways including the
activation of nuclear factor kappaB (NFκB) and Janus kinase/signal transducers
and activators of transcription (JAK/STAT) responsible for inflammation and
development of carcinogenic cascade. The pathomechanism of these changes remains 
little understood, but the Hp virulence factors affecting mainly gastric
epithelium have been postulated. Nevertheless, the changes associated with
inflammation progressing to cancer are not only limited to epithelial cells. The 
cells surrounding the tumor, mainly activated fibroblasts (CAFs -
cancer-associated fibroblasts) create molecular microenvironment promoting
tumorigenesis and cancer invasion. The downstream targets of STAT3,
epithelial-mesenchymal transition-inducing transcription factors (EMT-TFs) are
expressed in activated fibroblasts providing them with additional properties.
Thus, our aim was to determine if the Hp strain expressing CagA and VacA
cytotoxins may result in the activation/differentiation of rat gastric
fibroblasts resulting in NFκB and STAT3 signaling, which could lead to EMT-TFs
expression and secretome responsible for inflammatory and EMT inducing
microenvironment. In this study, gastric samples were harvested from 8-week-old
Spraque-Dowley rats and the primary and secondary fibroblast cultures were
established. The 70% confluent secondary fibroblast cultures were infected with 1
x 109 of live Hp expressing cytotoxins CagA VacA per dish and incubated in
humidified atmosphere for 3, 24, 48 and 72 hours, before the conditioned media or
the cells were used for endpoint experiments. As the control, fibroblast culture 
in DMEM with 10% FBS and antibiotics, free from Hp infection was used. The
expression of mRNA for 18S (control), toll-like receptors: TLR2 and TLR4, STAT3, 
NFκB p65/Rel A, inhibitor of NF-κB (Iκβ), Snail and Twist was determined by
RT-PCR. The protein expression of Snail and Twist was assessed by Western blot
technique. The fibroblast supernatant was collected at 72 hours from non-infected
and Hp (cagA+ vacA+)-infected culture and the concentrations of interleukin 8
(IL-8), hepatocyte growth factor (HGF) and stromal derived factor-1 (SDF-1) were 
measured by ELISA. In fibroblasts infected with Hp (cagA+ vacA+), the significant
increase of mRNA expression for both, TLR2 and TLR4, as well as STAT3, NFκB/RelA 
subunit was observed already after 3 hours of fibroblasts infection with Hp
strain compared with control non-infected fibroblasts. Simultaneously, the
significant decrease of Iκβ mRNA has been noticed starting from 48 hours after
the Hp infection of fibroblasts was carried out. The strong increase in the
expression of Snail1 and Twist mRNA was recorded already at 3 hours in
Hp-infected fibroblasts comparing to control non-infected fibroblasts and this
increase persisted at 24 and 48 hours being the most pronounced at 72 hours post 
incubation with Hp. The expression of Snail1 protein was observed after 3 hours
post Hp infection and this increase persisted throughout entire time periods upon
Hp infection. In contrast, no detectable level of Twist protein expression was
observed up to 72 hours post-infection neither in control conditions nor in
fibroblasts co-infected with Hp. These changes in fibroblasts were accompanied by
a significant increase in the release of HGF, SDF-1 and IL-8 determined in cell
supernatants collected from Hp-infected fibroblasts. These data indicate that the
activation/differentiation of rat gastric fibroblasts can occur directly by Hp
releasing CagA and indirectly through TLR2 and TLR4 and these effects can be
mediated by transcription factors NFκB and STAT3 signaling leading to rapid
Snail1 protein expression. We conclude that NFκB and STAT3 signaling together
with Snail1 protein expression may activate the secretome responsible for
fibroblasts inflammatory and EMT-inducing microenvironment likely serving as
prerequisite for GC development.

DOI: 10.26402/jpp.2019.5.08 
PMID: 31889044  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

