
1. PLoS Biol. 2020 Jan 2;18(1):e3000594. doi: 10.1371/journal.pbio.3000594.
eCollection 2020 Jan.

ATRX affects the repair of telomeric DSBs by promoting cohesion and a
DAXX-dependent activity.

Lovejoy CA(1), Takai K(1), Huh MS(2), Picketts DJ(2)(3)(4), de Lange T(1).

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory for Cell Biology and Genetics, The Rockefeller University, New
York, New York, United States of America.
(2)Regenerative Medicine Program, Ottawa Hospital Research Institute, Ottawa,
Ontario, Canada.
(3)Department of Biochemistry, Microbiology and Immunology, University of Ottawa,
Ottawa, Ontario, Canada.
(4)Department of Cellular and Molecular Medicine, University of Ottawa, Ottawa,
Ontario, Canada.

Alpha thalassemia/mental retardation syndrome X-linked chromatin remodeler
(ATRX), a DAXX (death domain-associated protein) interacting protein, is often
lost in cells using the alternative lengthening of telomeres (ALT) pathway, but
it is not known how ATRX loss leads to ALT. We report that ATRX deletion from
mouse cells altered the repair of telomeric double-strand breaks (DSBs) and
induced ALT-like phenotypes, including ALT-associated promyelocytic leukemia
(PML) bodies (APBs), telomere sister chromatid exchanges (T-SCEs), and
extrachromosomal telomeric signals (ECTSs). Mechanistically, we show that ATRX
affects telomeric DSB repair by promoting cohesion of sister telomeres and that
loss of ATRX in ALT cells results in diminished telomere cohesion. In addition,
we document a role for DAXX in the repair of telomeric DSBs. Removal of telomeric
cohesion in combination with DAXX deficiency recapitulates all telomeric DSB
repair phenotypes associated with ATRX loss. The data reveal that ATRX has an
effect on telomeric DSB repair and that this role involves both telomere cohesion
and a DAXX-dependent pathway.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pbio.3000594 
PMCID: PMC6959610
PMID: 31895940  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: I have read the journal's policy and the authors 
of this manuscript have the following competing interests: TdL is a member of the
Scientific Advisory Board of Calico (San Francisco, CA). The remaining authors
declare that no competing interests exist.

