
1. Vaccine. 2020 Feb 18;38(8):2016-2025. doi: 10.1016/j.vaccine.2019.12.052. Epub
2020 Jan 3.

Simultaneous cognate epitope recognition by bovine CD4 and CD8 T cells is
essential for primary expansion of antigen-specific cytotoxic T-cells following
ex vivo stimulation with a candidate Mycobacterium avium subsp. paratuberculosis 
peptide vaccine.

Abdellrazeq GS(1), Fry LM(2), Elnaggar MM(1), Bannantine JP(3), Schneider DA(2), 
Chamberlin WM, Mahmoud AHA(4), Park KT(5), Hulubei V(6), Davis WC(7).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Veterinary Microbiology and Pathology, Washington State
University, Pullman WA, USA; Department of Microbiology, Faculty of Veterinary
Medicine, Alexandria University, Egypt.
(2)USDA, ARS, Animal Disease Research Unit, Pullman, WA, USA.
(3)USDA, ARS, National Animal Disease Center, Ames, IA, USA.
(4)Department of Veterinary Microbiology and Pathology, Washington State
University, Pullman WA, USA; Veterinary Quarantine of Alexandria, General
Organization for Veterinary Services, Ministry of Agriculture and Land
Reclamation, Egypt.
(5)Department of Biotechnology, Inje University, Injero 197, Kimhae-si,
Gyeongsangnam-do, Republic of Korea.
(6)Department of Veterinary Microbiology and Pathology, Washington State
University, Pullman WA, USA.
(7)Department of Veterinary Microbiology and Pathology, Washington State
University, Pullman WA, USA. Electronic address: davisw@wsu.edu.

Studies in cattle show CD8 cytotoxic T cells (CTL), with the ability to kill
intracellular bacteria, develop following stimulation of monocyte-depleted
peripheral blood mononuclear cells (mdPBMC) with antigen presenting cells (APC,
i.e. conventional dendritic cells [cDC] and monocyte-derived DC [MoDC]) pulsed
with MMP, a membrane protein from Mycobacterium avium subsp. paratuberculosis
(Map) encoded by MAP2121c. CTL activity was diminished if CD4 T cells were
depleted from mdPBMC before antigen (Ag) presentation by APC, suggesting
simultaneous cognate recognition of MMP epitopes presented by MHC I and MHC II
molecules to CD4 and CD8 T cells is essential for development of CTL activity. To
explore this possibility, studies were conducted with mdPBMC cultures in the
presence of monoclonal antibodies (mAbs) specific for MHC class I and MHC class
II molecules. The CTL response of mdPBMC to MMP-pulsed APC was completely blocked
in the presence of mAbs to both MHC I and II molecules and also blocked in the
presence of mAbs to either MHC I or MHC II alone. The results demonstrate
simultaneous cognate recognition of Ag by CD4 and CD8 T cells is essential for
delivery of CD4 T cell help to CD8 T cells to elicit development of CTL.

Copyright © 2019 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.vaccine.2019.12.052 
PMID: 31902643  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of Competing Interest The authors
declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal
relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this
paper.

