
1. PLoS One. 2020 Jan 9;15(1):e0227707. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0227707.
eCollection 2020.

Assessment of peritoneal microbial features and tumor marker levels as potential 
diagnostic tools for ovarian cancer.

Miao R(1), Badger TC(2), Groesch K(3)(4), Diaz-Sylvester PL(3)(4), Wilson
T(3)(4), Ghareeb A(3)(4), Martin JA(4), Cregger M(5)(6), Welge M(7), Bushell
C(8), Auvil L(7), Zhu R(9), Brard L(4)(10), Braundmeier-Fleming A(2)(4)(10).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Statistics, University of Virginia, Charlottesville, Virginia,
United States of America.
(2)Department of Medical Microbiology, Immunology and Cell Biology, SIU School of
Medicine, Springfield, Illinois, United States of America.
(3)Center for Clinical Research, SIU School of Medicine, Springfield, Illinois,
United States of America.
(4)Department of Obstetrics & Gynecology, SIU School of Medicine, Springfield,
Illinois, United States of America.
(5)Oak Ridge National Laboratory, Oak Ridge, Tennessee, United States of America.
(6)Department of Ecology and Evolutionary Biology, University of Tennessee,
Knoxville, Tennessee, United States of America.
(7)National Center for Supercomputing Applications, University of Illinois at
Urbana-Champaign, Champaign, Illinois, United States of America.
(8)Applied Research Institute, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign,
Champaign, Illinois, United States of America.
(9)Department of Statistics, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign,
Champaign, Illinois, United States of America.
(10)Simmons Cancer Institute at SIU, Springfield, Illinois, United States of
America.

Epithelial ovarian cancer (OC) is the most deadly cancer of the female
reproductive system. To date, there is no effective screening method for early
detection of OC and current diagnostic armamentarium may include sonographic
grading of the tumor and analyzing serum levels of tumor markers, Cancer Antigen 
125 (CA-125) and Human epididymis protein 4 (HE4). Microorganisms (bacterial,
archaeal, and fungal cells) residing in mucosal tissues including the
gastrointestinal and urogenital tracts can be altered by different disease
states, and these shifts in microbial dynamics may help to diagnose disease
states. We hypothesized that the peritoneal microbial environment was altered in 
patients with OC and that inclusion of selected peritoneal microbial features
with current clinical features into prediction analyses will improve detection
accuracy of patients with OC. Blood and peritoneal fluid were collected from
consented patients that had sonography confirmed adnexal masses and were being
seen at SIU School of Medicine Simmons Cancer Institute. Blood was processed and 
serum HE4 and CA-125 were measured. Peritoneal fluid was collected at the time of
surgery and processed for Next Generation Sequencing (NGS) using 16S V4 exon
bacterial primers and bioinformatics analyses. We found that patients with OC had
a unique peritoneal microbial profile compared to patients with a benign mass.
Using ensemble modeling and machine learning pathways, we identified 18 microbial
features that were highly specific to OC pathology. Prediction analyses confirmed
that inclusion of microbial features with serum tumor marker levels and control
features (patient age and BMI) improved diagnostic accuracy compared to currently
used models. We conclude that OC pathogenesis alters the peritoneal microbial
environment and that these unique microbial features are important for accurate
diagnosis of OC. Our study warrants further analyses of the importance of
microbial features in regards to oncological diagnostics and possible prognostic 
and interventional medicine.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0227707 
PMCID: PMC6952086
PMID: 31917801  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have declared that no competing
interests exist.

