
1. J Anim Sci. 2020 Jan 1;98(1). pii: skz391. doi: 10.1093/jas/skz391.

Characterization of metabolic and inflammatory profiles of transition dairy cows 
fed an energy-restricted diet.

Esposito G(1)(2), Raffrenato E(1), Lukamba SD(2), Adnane M(3), Irons PC(2)(4),
Cormican P(5), Tasara T(6), Chapwanya A(2)(7).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Animal Sciences, Faculty of Agricultural Science, Stellenbosch
University, Stellenbosch, South Africa.
(2)Department of Production Animal Studies, Faculty of Veterinary Science,
University of Pretoria, Pretoria, South Africa.
(3)Institute of Veterinary Sciences, Ibn-Khaldoun University, Tiaret, Algeria.
(4)School of Veterinary and Life Science, Murdoch University, Perth, Australia.
(5)Department of Animal and Grassland Research, Animal Bioscience Research
Centre, Teagasc, Ireland.
(6)Institute for Food Safety and Hygiene, Vetsuisse Faculty, University of
Zurich, Zürich, Switzerland.
(7)Department of Clinical Sciences, Ross University School of Veterinary
Medicine, Basseterre, St. Kitts and Nevis.

Periparturient diseases of dairy cows are caused by disproportionate energy
metabolism, mineral imbalance, and perturbed immune function. The aim of the
present study was to characterize metabolism, innate immune endometrial gene
expression, and uterine microbial populations of transition animals receiving
normal or restricted energy diets. Pregnant multiparous Holstein cows (n = 14)
were randomly assigned to one of the two dietary treatments from 20 d prepartum
until 35 d postpartum (DPP). One group was fed a diet providing 100% energy
requirements (NE), whereas the other received an energy-restricted diet providing
80% energy requirements (RE). Feed intake, milk yield, body weight, body
condition score, temperature, respiratory, and pulse rate were recorded. After
calving, blood was collected weekly to analyze nonesterified fatty acids (NEFAs),
β-hydroxybutyrate (BHB), and total cholesterol (TC). Endometrial cytobrushes were
collected for gene expression analysis of inflammatory markers, microbial
populations determination, and cytological evaluation. The restricted energy diet
did not alter feed intake or milk yield but changed energy balance and
metabolites levels (P < 0.05). In fact, RE animals had high NEFA and BHB levels, 
and low TC concentrations (P < 0.05). Moreover, RE animals had upregulated gene
expression of serum amyloid A3 (SAA3) at 35 DPP (P < 0.05) and CXC chemokine
receptor 2 (CXCR2) at 14 DPP (P < 0.01). Interleukin (IL) 1 and IL8 genes were
downregulated 14 DPP but upregulated 35 DPP in RE animals, whereas IL6 and
lipopolysaccharide-binding protein (LBP) genes were upregulated at 14 DPP
(P ≤ 0.05). The most abundant phyla in RE animals (n = 3) were Bacteroidetes and 
Fusobacteria, whereas Proteobacteria was the least abundant at both 14 and 35
DPP. In conclusion, it can be speculated that energy balance is one of the main
drivers for uterine inflammation by affecting metabolism, immune function, and
uterine microbiota. However, these findings should be validated in a larger
sample size.

© The Author(s) 2020. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the
American Society of Animal Science. All rights reserved. For permissions, please 
e-mail: journals.permissions@oup.com.

DOI: 10.1093/jas/skz391 
PMCID: PMC6984754
PMID: 31917830  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

