
1. Biosci Rep. 2020 Jan 31;40(1). pii: BSR20193156. doi: 10.1042/BSR20193156.

Clozapine protects adult neural stem cells from ketamine-induced cell death in
correlation with decreased apoptosis and autophagy.

Lundberg M(1)(2), Curbo S(3), Bohman H(1)(2), Agartz I(2)(4)(5), Ögren SO(6),
Patrone C(1), Mansouri S(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Clinical Science and Education, Södersjukhuset, Internal
Medicine, Karolinska Institutet, Stockholm, Sweden.
(2)Centre for Psychiatry Research, Department of Clinical Neuroscience,
Karolinska Institutet, Stockholm, Sweden.
(3)Department of Laboratory Medicine, Division of Clinical Microbiology,
Karolinska Institutet, Stockholm, Sweden.
(4)NORMENT, KG Jebsen Centre for Psychosis Research, Division of Mental Health
and Addiction, Institute of Clinical Medicine, University of Oslo, Oslo, Norway.
(5)Department of Psychiatric Research, Diakonhjemmet Hospital, Oslo, Norway.
(6)Department of Neuroscience, Karolinska Institutet, Stockholm, Sweden.

Adult neurogenesis, the production of newborn neurons from neural stem cells
(NSCs) has been suggested to be decreased in patients with schizophrenia. A
similar finding was observed in an animal model of schizophrenia, as indicated by
decreased bromodeoxyuridine (BrdU) labelling cells in response to a
non-competitive N-methyl-d-aspartate (NMDA) receptor antagonist. The
antipsychotic drug clozapine was shown to counteract the observed decrease in
BrdU-labelled cells in hippocampal dentate gyrus (DG). However, phenotypic
determination by immunohistochemistry analysis could not reveal whether
BrdU-positive cells were indeed NSCs. Using a previously established cell model
for analysing NSC protection in vitro, we investigated a protective effect of
clozapine on NSCs. Primary NSCs were isolated from the mouse subventricular zone 
(SVZ), we show that clozapine had a NSC protective activity alone, as evident by 
employing an ATP cell viability assay. In contrast, haloperidol did not show any 
NSC protective properties. Subsequently, cells were exposed to the
non-competitive NMDA-receptor antagonist ketamine. Clozapine, but not
haloperidol, had a NSC protective/anti-apoptotic activity against
ketamine-induced cytotoxicity. The observed NSC protective activity of clozapine 
was associated with increased expression of the anti-apoptotic marker Bcl-2,
decreased expression of the pro-apoptotic cleaved form of caspase-3 and
associated with decreased expression of the autophagosome marker 1A/1B-light
chain 3 (LC3-II). Collectively, our findings suggest that clozapine may have a
protective/anti-apoptotic effect on NSCs, supporting previous in vivo
observations, indicating a neurogenesis-promoting activity for clozapine. If the 
data are further confirmed in vivo, the results may encourage an expanded use of 
clozapine to restore impaired neurogenesis in schizophrenia.

© 2020 The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1042/BSR20193156 
PMCID: PMC6981094
PMID: 31919522  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

