
1. J Ethnopharmacol. 2020 Apr 6;251:112552. doi: 10.1016/j.jep.2020.112552. Epub
2020 Jan 9.

Enumeration of various Ayurvedic formulations listed in an ancient palm-leaf
manuscript of Rayalaseema region in Andhra Pradesh state, India.

Chandramouli B(1), Mallikarjuna K(2).

Author information: 
(1)Sri Gurajada Apparao Government Degree College, Yellamanchili, Visakhapatnam
District, Andhra Pradesh, India.
(2)Department of Botany and Microbiology, Acharya Nagarjuna University,
Nagarjunanagar-522 510, Guntur, Andhra Pradesh, India. Electronic address:
mallikarjunaanu@gmail.com.

ETHNOPHARMACOLOGICAL RELEVANCE: Ancient India relied on manuscripts written by
scholars for storing, transferring and retrieving the information pertaining to
culture, traditions, religion, geography and political issues. Similarly,
Ayurveda, an ancient human health care management system in India and most of its
information is available through palm-leaf manuscripts. Though each palm-leaf can
persist for a fairly long time, it suffers gradual deterioration owing to
physical, chemincal and biological factors, thus warranting digitiation. The
palm-leaf manuscripts of Ayurveda are extensively studied for finding new drug or
treatment methods to new-age diseases.
AIM OF THE STUDY: The present study concerns an unpublished ancient Telugu
palm-leaf manuscript containing Ayurvedic medicine information enscripted on 33
palm-leaves. Since the palm-leaf manuscript is very old, the manual
documentation, translation, digitization and analysis of it may shed light on
hidden ayurvedic information that may be useful to the modern society.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: The palm-leaf manuscript with 33 folios were manually
documented and digitized into a Telugu book followed by translation into English.
The scientific names of historical diseases, plants, animals, metals and minerals
were identified based on published sources.
RESULTS: A critical scrutiny of the palm-leaf manuscript revealed 120
formulations with 164 plants for 29 different kinds of diseases such as meha and 
prameha (urinary problems), eye diseases, skin diseases, respiratory diseases,
fevers, digestive disorders, jaundice, tuberculosis, cancer and so on. Plant and 
animal products, metals and minerals mentioned in the said formulations were
identified and listed.
CONCLUSION: Basing on our study, it is concluded that the said manuscript
contains mono-or poly-herbo-mineral formulations for the treatment of various
ailments.This information can be incorporated into and compared with available
data bases to find out the effectiveness of the drug or formulation for any given
diseases. Further validation of the formulations can be done by phytochemical and
in vivo pharmacological assays.

Copyright © 2020 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jep.2020.112552 
PMID: 31926316  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

