
1. Front Physiol. 2019 Dec 11;10:1474. doi: 10.3389/fphys.2019.01474. eCollection
2019.

Size Is the Major Determinant of Pumping Rates in Marine Sponges.

Morganti TM(1)(2), Ribes M(2), Yahel G(3), Coma R(4).

Author information: 
(1)Max Planck Institute for Marine Microbiology, HGF MPG Joint Research Group for
Deep-Sea Ecology and Technology, Bremen, Germany.
(2)Department of Marine Biology and Oceanography, Institut de Ciències del Mar
(ICM-CSIC), Barcelona, Spain.
(3)The Faculty of Marine Science, Ruppin Academic Center, Michmoret, Israel.
(4)Department of Marine Ecology, Centre d'Estudis Avançats de Blanes (CEAB-CSIC),
Girona, Spain.

Sponges play an important ecological function in many benthic habitats. They
filter large volumes of water, retain suspended particles with high efficiency,
and process dissolved compounds. Nevertheless, the factors that regulate sponge
pumping rate and its relation to environmental factors have been rarely studied. 
We examined, in situ, the variation of pumping rates for five Mediterranean
sponge species and its relationship to temperature, particulate food abundance
and sponge size over two annual cycles. Surprisingly, temperature and food
concentration had only a small effect on pumping rates, and the seasonal
variation of pumping rates was small (1.9-2.5 folds). Sponge size was the main
determinant of the specific pumping rate (pumping normalized to sponge volume or 
mass). Within the natural size distribution of each species, the volume-specific 
pumping rate [PR V , ml min-1 (cm sponge)-3] decreased (up to 33 folds) with the 
increase in sponge volume (V, cm3), conforming to an allometric power function
(PR V = aVb ) with negative exponents. The strong dependence of the size-specific
pumping rate on the sponge size suggests that the simplistic use of this value to
categorize sponge species and predict their activity may be misleading. For
example, for small specimens, size-specific pumping rates of the two
low-microbial-abundance (LMA) species (allometric exponent b of -0.2 and -0.3)
were similar to those of two of the high-microbial-abundance (HMA) species (b of 
-0.5 and -0.7). However, for larger specimens, size-specific pumping rates were
markedly different. Our results suggest that the pumping rate of the sponges we
studied can be approximated using the measured allometric constants alone in
conjunction with surveys of sponge abundance and size distribution. This
information is essential for the quantification of in situ feeding and
respiration rates and for estimates of the magnitude of sponge-mediated energy
and nutrient fluxes at the community level. Further work is required to establish
if and to what extent the low seasonal effect and the strong size dependency of
pumping rate can be generalized to other sponges and habitats.

Copyright © 2019 Morganti, Ribes, Yahel and Coma.

DOI: 10.3389/fphys.2019.01474 
PMCID: PMC6917621
PMID: 31920688 

