
1. Infect Genet Evol. 2020 Jun;80:104189. doi: 10.1016/j.meegid.2020.104189. Epub
2020 Jan 10.

Bioinformatics analyses of immunogenic T-cell epitopes of LeIF and PpSP15
proteins from Leishmania major and sand fly saliva used as model antigens for the
design of a multi-epitope vaccine to control leishmaniasis.

Bordbar A(1), Bagheri KP(2), Ebrahimi S(3), Parvizi P(4).

Author information: 
(1)Molecular Systematics Laboratory, Parasitology Department, Microbiology
Research Center, Pasteur Institute of Iran, Tehran, Iran. Electronic address:
a_bordbar@pasteur.ac.ir.
(2)Venom and Biotherapeutics Molecules Lab., Biotechnology Dept., Biotechnology
Research Center, Pasteur Institute of Iran, Tehran, Iran.
(3)Molecular Systematics Laboratory, Parasitology Department, Microbiology
Research Center, Pasteur Institute of Iran, Tehran, Iran.
(4)Molecular Systematics Laboratory, Parasitology Department, Microbiology
Research Center, Pasteur Institute of Iran, Tehran, Iran. Electronic address:
parp@pasteur.ac.ir.

Leishmaniasis is caused by protozoan parasites belonging to 20 Leishmania
species. This infectious disease is transmitted by bites of infected phlebotomine
sandflies, and is widespread in 97 countries throughout the world. No preventive 
or effective vaccine has been developed yet. In this study, diverse computational
methods were integrated to calculate evolutionary divergence, immunogenicity,
IFN-γ production, epitope conservancy, and population coverage of protein fusion 
models of LeIF-SP15 namely SaLeish. Immunogenicity of LeIF of Leishmania species 
and SP15 of sandfly saliva has not been investigated in-silico in fusion form. A 
complete set of 9-mer MHC class I and 15-mer MHC class II peptides were
identified with a high affinity for the antigenic epitopes of SaLeish inducing
specific responses of CD8+ and CD4+ T cells from BALB/c and human. Our preferred 
approach was determining truncated fragment of SaLeish rather than a whole length
bearing the capacity to trigger specific immune response. Phylogenetic analysis
showed that LeIF protein is under balancing selection and is conserved between
different Leishmania species. Selected SaLeish model contained 19 and 35
antigenic peptides for MHC class I and II, respectively, with strong binding
affinity to both highly frequent HLA-I and HLA-II alleles. Analysis of class I
CTL epitopes showed that promiscuous peptides of KSLKADIRK, MSCIPHCKY, LQAGVIVAV,
and YQYYGFVAM have greater affinity to interact with HLA-A*01:01, HLA-A*02 (03,
06), HLA-A*30:02, HLA-B*40:01, and HLA-B*52:01 molecules. Population coverage
with a range of 78-85% confirmed SaLeish-Model4 as an appropriate vaccine
candidate among Persian, South Asia, Europe, and North America population. Also, 
predicted antigenic epitopes of AKPEIRTFSNVLIKY, TRVQDDLRKLQAGVI, and
VALFSATMPEEVLEL corresponding to MHC class II were found to provide strong
ability to produce IFNγ toward TH(1)-biased-DTH responses. Findings of the
current investigation warrant the future experimental assessment of promising
SaLeish prophylaxis vaccine that is capable to enhance both innate and specific
cellular immune responses.

Copyright © 2020. Published by Elsevier B.V.

DOI: 10.1016/j.meegid.2020.104189 
PMID: 31931259 

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of Competing Interest The authors
declare that the present research was conducted in absence of any commercial or
financial relationships that could be construed as a potential conflict of
interest.

