
1. Photodiagnosis Photodyn Ther. 2020 Mar;29:101659. doi:
10.1016/j.pdpdt.2020.101659. Epub 2020 Jan 13.

Efficacy of antimicrobial photodynamic and photobiomodulation therapy against
Treponema denticola, fusobacterium nucleatum and human beta defensin-2 levels in 
patients with gingivitis undergoing fixed orthodontic treatment: A
clinic-laboratory study.

Alqerban A(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Preventive Dental Sciences, College of Dentistry, Prince Sattam 
Bin Abdulaziz University Al-Kharj, Saudi Arabia; Department of Preventive Dental 
Sciences, College of Dentistry, Dar Al Uloom University, Riyadh, Saudi Arabia.
Electronic address: alqerbanali@gmail.com.

BACKGROUND: Evidence suggests that molecular pathways are involved in human
β-defensin (hBD)-2 mRNA regulation in human gingival epithelial cells stimulated 
with periodontal bacteria. This clinical and laboratory study evaluated the
efficacy of two laser therapies including antimicrobial photodynamic therapy
(aPDT) and photobiomodulation (PBM) therapy as an adjunct to ultrasonic scaling
(US) on the gingival crevicular fluid (GCF) levels of hBD-2 and subgingival
Treponema denticola (T. denticola) and Fusobacterium nucleatum (F. nucleatum)
spp., in patients undergoing fixed orthodontic therapy and gingivitis.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: Forty-five patients undergoing fixed orthodontic treatment
were randomly divided into three groups based on the type of treatment rendered: 
Group-I: aPDT as an adjunct to US, Group-II: PBM as an adjunct to US and,
Group-III: US alone. Full-mouth plaque scores (FMPS), bleeding on probing (FMBOP)
and probing depth (PD) were assessed. GCF was collected for estimation of hBD-1
using enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay. Plaque samples were used to quantify T. 
denticola and F. nucleatum spp by quantitative polymerase chain reaction. All
clinical and laboratory investigations were carried out at baseline (T0), day 30 
(T30) and day 60 (T60).
RESULTS: FMPS and FMBOP showed statistically significant reduction in all groups 
at T30 and T60 from T0. No inter-group differences were observed between any
groups at follow-up. Mean PD remained stable for Group-II and Group-III, while
Group-I showed progressive reduction at T60. The GCF levels of hBD-2
progressively decreased in Group-I (aPDT) while the levels increased slightly at 
T60 in Group-III. The levels in Group-II (PBM) remained stable from T30 to T60.
Statistically significant reduction was seen for Group-I when compared with
Group-II and Group-III at T60 (p = 0.045). A significant reduction was observed
for T. denticola in only Group-I patients at T30 (p = 0.031) and T60 (p = 0.047).
A significant reduction was seen in both Group-I and Group-II patients at T30 and
T60. The number of sites with BOP was correlated with both bacterial species
(Table 4). Only T. denticola showed positive correlation to mean BOP after
correcting for multiple testing.
CONCLUSION: aPDT and PBM showed similar improvement in gingival inflammatory and 
microbiological parameters compared to US. aPDT assisted in modest reduction of
hBD-2 in patients undergoing fixed orthodontic treatment.

Copyright © 2020 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.pdpdt.2020.101659 
PMID: 31945548  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of Competing Interest The authors
report no conflict of interest in the present study.

