
1. J Dermatol Sci. 2020 Feb;97(2):109-116. doi: 10.1016/j.jdermsci.2019.12.010. Epub
2019 Dec 27.

Ex vivo culture of lesional psoriasis skin for pharmacological testing.

Tiirikainen ML(1), Woetmann A(2), Norsgaard H(3), Santamaria-Babí LF(4), Lovato
P(5).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Immunology and Microbiology, University of Copenhagen,
Copenhagen N, Denmark; Skin Research, LEO Pharma A/S, Ballerup, Denmark.
Electronic address: mtiirikainen@sund.ku.dk.
(2)Department of Immunology and Microbiology, University of Copenhagen,
Copenhagen N, Denmark. Electronic address: awoetmann@sund.ku.dk.
(3)Skin Research, LEO Pharma A/S, Ballerup, Denmark. Electronic address:
hnddk@leo-pharma.com.
(4)Translational Immunology Group, Department of Cellular Biology, Physiology and
Immunology, University of Barcelona, Barcelona, Spain. Electronic address:
luis.santamaria@ub.edu.
(5)Skin Research, LEO Pharma A/S, Ballerup, Denmark. Electronic address:
paldk@leo-pharma.com.

BACKGROUND: Psoriasis is a chronic, inflammatory skin disorder resulting from a
complex interplay between immune and skin cells via release of soluble mediators.
While a lot is known about the molecular mechanisms behind psoriasis
pathogenesis, there is still a need for preclinical research models that
accuratelyreplicate the disease.
OBJECTIVE: This study aimed to develop and characterize ex vivo culture of
psoriasis skin as a model for pharmacological testing, where the immunological
events of psoriasis can be followed.
METHODS: Full thickness punch biopsies of lesional psoriasis skin were cultured
in submerged conditions up to 144 h followingin situ T cell stimulation with
rhIL-23 and anti-CD3 and anti-CD28 antibodies. The T cell mediated skin
inflammation was assessed by gene and protein l analysis for a panel of
inflammatory mediators. Tissue integrity and morphology were evaluated by
histological analysis.
RESULTS: T cell stimulation resulted in functional and psoriasis specificin situ 
activation of T cells. The expression levels of most of the proinflammatory
mediators related to both immune and skin cells were comparable to these in
freshly isolated tissue at 48 and 96 h of culture. Tissue integrity and
morphology were sustained up to 96 h. Treatment with a corticosteroid reduced the
expression of several pro-inflammatory cytokines and chemokines, whereas
anti-IL-17A antibody treatment reduced the expression of the IL-17A downstream
markers IL-8 and DEFB4.
CONCLUSION: By preserving keyimmunopathological mechanisms of psoriasis, ex vivo 
culture of psoriasis skin can be used for the investigation of inflammatory
processes of psoriasis and for preclinical drug discovery research.

Copyright © 2020 The Authors. Published by Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jdermsci.2019.12.010 
PMID: 31948839  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of Competing Interest The authors
have no conflicts of interest to declare.

