
1. Infect Immun. 2020 Mar 23;88(4). pii: e00819-19. doi: 10.1128/IAI.00819-19. Print
2020 Mar 23.

Epidermal Growth Factor Receptor and Transforming Growth Factor β Signaling
Pathways Cooperate To Mediate Chlamydia Pathogenesis.

Igietseme JU(1)(2), Partin J(3), George Z(3), Omosun Y(3)(2), Goldstein J(3),
Joseph K(3), Ellerson D(3), Eko FO(2), Pohl J(3), Bandea C(3), Black CM(3).

Author information: 
(1)Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC), Atlanta, Georgia, USA
jigietseme@cdc.gov.
(2)Morehouse School of Medicine, Atlanta, Georgia, USA.
(3)Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC), Atlanta, Georgia, USA.

Human genital Chlamydia infection is a major public health concern due to the
serious reproductive system complications. Chlamydia binds several receptor
tyrosine kinases (RTKs) on host cells, including the epidermal growth factor
receptor (EGFR), and activates cellular signaling cascades for host invasion,
cytoskeletal remodeling, optimal inclusion development, and induction of
pathogenic epithelial-mesenchyme transition (EMT). Chlamydia also upregulates
transforming growth factor beta (TGF-β) expression, whose signaling pathway
synergizes with the EGFR cascade, but its role in infectivity, inclusions, and
EMT induction is unknown. We hypothesized that the EGFR and TGF-β signaling
pathways cooperate during chlamydial infection for optimal inclusion development 
and stable EMT induction. The results revealed that Chlamydia upregulated TGF-β
expression as early as 6 h postinfection of epithelial cells and stimulated both 
the EGFR and TGF-β signaling pathways. Inhibition of either the EGFR or TGF-βR1
signaling substantially reduced inclusion development; however, the combined
inhibition of both EGFR and TGF-βR1 signaling reduced inclusions by over 90% and 
prevented EMT induction. Importantly, EGFR inhibition suppressed TGF-β
expression, and an inhibitory thrombospondin-1 (Tsp1)-based peptide inhibited
chlamydia-induced EMT, revealing a major source of active TGF-β during infection.
Finally, TGF-βR signaling inhibition suppressed the expression of transforming
acidic coiled-coil protein-3 (TACC3), which stabilizes EGFR signaling, suggesting
reciprocal regulation between TGF-β and EGFR signaling during chlamydial
infection. Thus, RTK-mediated host invasion by chlamydia upregulated TGF-β
expression and signaling, which cooperated with other cellular signaling cascades
and cytoskeletal remodeling to support optimal inclusion development and EMT
induction. This finding may provide new targets for chlamydial disease biomarkers
and prevention.

Copyright © 2020 American Society for Microbiology.

DOI: 10.1128/IAI.00819-19 
PMCID: PMC7093136
PMID: 31964750  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

