
1. J Antimicrob Chemother. 2020 Apr 1;75(4):903-906. doi: 10.1093/jac/dkz542.

Occurrence of NDM-1-producing Morganella morganii and Proteus mirabilis in a
single patient in Portugal: probable in vivo transfer by conjugation.

Aires-de-Sousa M(1)(2)(3), Ortiz de la Rosa JM(1), Goncalves ML(4), Costa A(4),
Nordmann P(1)(2)(3)(5)(6)(7), Poirel L(1)(5)(6).

Author information: 
(1)Emerging Antibiotic Resistance Unit, Medical and Molecular Microbiology,
Faculty of Science and Medicine, University of Fribourg, Fribourg, Switzerland.
(2)Escola Superior de Saúde da Cruz Vermelha Portuguesa (ESSCVP), Lisboa,
Portugal.
(3)Laboratory of Molecular Genetics, Instituto de Tecnologia Química e Biológica 
António Xavier (ITQB), Universidade Nova de Lisboa (UNL), Oeiras, Portugal.
(4)Hospital SAMS, Lisbon, Portugal.
(5)Swiss National Reference Center for Emerging Antibiotic Resistance (NARA),
University of Fribourg, Fribourg, Switzerland.
(6)INSERM European Unit (IAME, France), University of Fribourg, Fribourg,
Switzerland.
(7)University Hospital Center and University of Lausanne, Lausanne, Switzerland.

OBJECTIVES: To decipher the genetics of acquisition of carbapenemase-encoding
genes identified in two carbapenem-resistant Enterobacteriaceae recovered from a 
single patient in Portugal.
METHODS: Carbapenemase genes were searched by PCR assays and mating-out assays
were performed to further characterize the plasmid support of the carbapenemase
genes. Genetic characterization of the plasmid supports was performed by
whole-plasmid sequencing using the Illumina technology.
RESULTS: We identified here two NDM-1-producing isolates, namely a Morganella
morganii and a Proteus mirabilis, sharing the same blaNDM-1-positive plasmid.
This 154 kb plasmid belonged to the IncA/C2 type, recently renamed IncC, and
co-harboured two AmpC β-lactamase genes, namely blaCMY-4 and blaDHA-1, in
addition to the 16S rRNA methylase gene armA encoding high-level resistance to
aminoglycosides. In addition, the M. morganii isolate produced the CTX-M-33
extended-spectrum β-lactamase possessing weak carbapenemase activity, encoded by 
another plasmid.
CONCLUSIONS: We showed here that, in addition to KPC-type and OXA-181
carbapenemases, which have been identified as widespread in this country, another
concern is the emergence of NDM-1-producing enterobacterial isolates in Portugal.
We demonstrated here the in vivo plasmid transfer of a blaNDM-1-positive plasmid 
leading to dissemination of this carbapenemase gene within different
enterobacterial species in a single patient.

© The Author(s) 2020. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the
British Society for Antimicrobial Chemotherapy. All rights reserved. For
permissions, please email: journals.permissions@oup.com.

DOI: 10.1093/jac/dkz542 
PMID: 31971235 

