
1. Environ Pollut. 2020 May;260:113913. doi: 10.1016/j.envpol.2020.113913. Epub 2020
Jan 6.

Occurrence of carbapenemase-producing Enterobacteriaceae in a Portuguese river:
blaNDM, blaKPC and blaGES among the detected genes.

Teixeira P(1), Tacão M(2), Pureza L(3), Gonçalves J(4), Silva A(5),
Cruz-Schneider MP(5), Henriques I(6).

Author information: 
(1)Biology Department, University of Aveiro, Aveiro, Portugal; CESAM (Centre for 
Marine and Environmental Studies), University of Aveiro, Aveiro, Portugal.
(2)Biology Department, University of Aveiro, Aveiro, Portugal; CESAM (Centre for 
Marine and Environmental Studies), University of Aveiro, Aveiro, Portugal.
Electronic address: martat@ua.pt.
(3)Biology Department, University of Aveiro, Aveiro, Portugal; Laboratory of
Genomics and Bioinformatics, Center of Genomics and Systems Biology, Institute of
Biological Sciences, Federal University of Pará, Belém, Pará, Brazil.
(4)Biology Department, University of Aveiro, Aveiro, Portugal.
(5)Laboratory of Genomics and Bioinformatics, Center of Genomics and Systems
Biology, Institute of Biological Sciences, Federal University of Pará, Belém,
Pará, Brazil.
(6)CESAM (Centre for Marine and Environmental Studies), University of Aveiro,
Aveiro, Portugal; Department of Life Sciences, Faculty of Science and Technology,
University of Coimbra, Coimbra, Portugal.

Carbapenems are used as last-resort drugs to treat infections caused by
multidrug-resistant bacteria. Despite the increasing number of reports of
carbapenem-resistant Enterobacteriaceae (CRE), there is still limited information
on their distribution or prevalence in the environment. Our aim was to assess the
occurrence of CRE in the Lis river (Portugal) and to characterize the genetic
platforms linked to carbapenemase genes. We collected six water samples from
sites near a wastewater treatment plant (n = 4 samples) and livestock farms
(n = 2). Twenty-four CRE were characterized by BOX element-polymerase chain
reaction (BOX-PCR), and thirteen representative isolates were analysed by
Pulsed-Field Gel Electrophoresis (PFGE) and by sequencing the 16S rRNA gene.
Antimicrobial susceptibility testing, PCR screening for carbapenemase-encoding
genes, conjugation experiments and plasmid analysis were performed. Four isolates
were chosen for whole-genome sequencing. All water samples contained CRE
(4.0 CFU/mL on average). Representative isolates were multidrug-resistant
(resistant to ciprofloxacin, trimethoprim-sulfamethoxazole and to all β-lactams
tested) and were identified as K. pneumoniae, Enterobacter and Citrobacter.
Isolates carried plasmids and harboured carbapenemase-encoding genes: blaKPC-3 in
K. pneumoniae (n = 9), blaNDM-1 in Enterobacter (n = 3) and blaGES-5 in
Citrobacter (n = 1). Conjugation experiments were successful in two Klebsiella
isolates. Enterobacter PFGE profiles grouped in one cluster while Klebsiella were
divided in three clusters and a singleton. Whole-genome sequencing analysis
revealed blaGES-5 within a novel class 3 integron (In3-16) located on an
IncQ/pQ7-like plasmid in Citrobacter freundii CR16. blaKPC-3 was present on
IncFIA-FII pBK30683-like plasmids, which were subsequently confirmed in all
K. pneumoniae (n = 9). Furthermore, blaKPC-3 was part of a genomic island in
K. pneumoniae CR12. In E. roggenkampii CR11, blaNDM-1 was on an IncA/C2 plasmid. 
The carbapenemase-encoding plasmids harboured other resistance determinants and
mobile genetic elements. Our results demonstrate that Lis river is contaminated
with CRE, highlighting the need for monitoring antibiotic resistance in aquatic
environments, especially to last-resort drugs.

Copyright © 2020 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.envpol.2020.113913 
PMID: 31972417  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

