
1. Mol Ecol. 2020 Mar;29(5):886-898. doi: 10.1111/mec.15369. Epub 2020 Feb 20.

Environmental plasticity and colonisation history in the Atlantic salmon
microbiome: A translocation experiment.

Uren Webster TM(1), Rodriguez-Barreto D(1), Castaldo G(1), Gough P(2), Consuegra 
S(1), Garcia de Leaniz C(1).

Author information: 
(1)Centre for Sustainable Aquatic Research, College of Science, Swansea
University, Swansea, UK.
(2)Cynrig Fish Culture Unit, Natural Resources Wales, Llanfrynach, UK.

Microbial communities associated with the gut and the skin are strongly
influenced by environmental factors, and can rapidly adapt to change. Historical 
processes may also affect the microbiome. In particular, variation in microbial
colonisation in early life has the potential to induce lasting effects on
microbial assemblages. However, little is known about the relative extent of
microbiome plasticity or the importance of historical colonisation effects
following environmental change, especially for nonmammalian species. To
investigate this we performed a reciprocal translocation of Atlantic salmon
between artificial and semi-natural conditions. Wild and hatchery-reared fry were
transferred to three common garden experimental environments for 6 weeks:
standard hatchery conditions, hatchery conditions with an enriched diet, and
simulated wild conditions. We characterized the faecal and skin microbiome of
individual fish before and after the environmental translocation, using a BACI
(before-after-control-impact) design. We found evidence of extensive microbiome
plasticity for both the gut and skin, with the greatest changes in alpha and beta
diversity associated with the largest changes in environment and diet. Microbiome
richness and diversity were entirely determined by environment, with no
detectable effects of fish origin, and there was also a near-complete turnover in
microbiome structure. However, we also identified, for the first time in fish,
evidence of historical colonisation effects reflecting early-life experience,
including ASVs characteristic of captive rearing. These results have important
implications for host adaptation to local selective pressures, and highlight how 
conditions experienced during early life can have a long-term influence on the
microbiome and, potentially, host health.

© 2020 The Authors. Molecular Ecology published by John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/mec.15369 
PMCID: PMC7078932
PMID: 32011775  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

