
1. Pediatr Pulmonol. 2020 Apr;55(4):959-967. doi: 10.1002/ppul.24671. Epub 2020 Feb 
5.

Antibody response against Pseudomonas aeruginosa and its relationship with immune
mediators in the upper and lower airways of cystic fibrosis patients.

Mauch RM(1), Hentschel J(2), Aanaes K(3), Barucha A(4), Nolasco da Silva
MT(1)(5), Levy CE(6), Høiby N(7)(8), Mainz JG(4)(9).

Author information: 
(1)Center for Investigation in Pediatrics, School of Medical Sciences, University
of Campinas, Campinas, São Paulo, Brazil.
(2)Institute of Human Genetics, University of Leipzig, Leipzig, Germany.
(3)Department of Oto-Rhino-Laryngology, Rigshospitalet (Copenhagen University
Hospital), Copenhagen, Denmark.
(4)Department of Pediatric Pulmonology/Cystic Fibrosis Center, Brandenburg
Medical School (MHB) University, Klinikum Westbrandenburg, Brandenburg an der
Havel, Germany.
(5)Department of Pediatrics, School of Medical Sciences, University of Campinas, 
Campinas, São Paulo, Brazil.
(6)Department of Clinical Pathology, School of Medical Sciences, University of
Campinas, Campinas, São Paulo, Brazil.
(7)Department of International Health, Immunology, and Microbiology, Costerton
Biofilm Center, Faculty of Health and Medical Sciences, University of Copenhagen,
Copenhagen, Denmark.
(8)Department of Clinical Microbiology, Rigshospitalet, Copenhagen University
Hospital, Copenhagen, Denmark.
(9)Cystic Fibrosis Center for Children and Adults, Jena University Hospital,
Jena, Germany.

BACKGROUND: The upper airways (UAW) are a niche and a reservoir of Pseudomonas
aeruginosa strains that cause chronic infection of the lower airways (LAW) in
cystic fibrosis (CF). Here, we assessed the role of anti-P. aeruginosa
immunoglobulin A (IgA) and IgG antibodies in upper and lower airway infections in
cystic fibrosis patients.
METHODS: Nasal lavage fluid and induced sputum samples of 40 CF patients were
microbiologically cultured. We searched for correlations between anti-P.
aeruginosa IgA and IgG levels, measured by enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay
(optical density), and unspecific immune mediators in both specimens.
RESULTS: Anti-P. aeruginosa IgA (median optical density: 0.953 vs 0.298) and IgG 
(0.120 vs 0.059) were significantly higher in nasal lavage than in sputum, but
not significantly different between patients with and without chronic P.
aeruginosa infection in UAW. Matrix metallopeptidase-9 (MMP-9) in nasal lavage
and neutrophil elastase (NE) in sputum were predictors of IgA in nasal lavage and
IgA in sputum, respectively. IgA was a predictor of myeloperoxidase (MPO) in
nasal lavage. Tissue inhibitor of metalloproteinases-1 (TIMP-1) was a predictor
of IgG in sputum. IgG, TIMP-1, and NE in sputum were predictors of IgG in nasal
lavage.
CONCLUSION: The anti-P. aeruginosa IgA response was more prominent in CF
patients' UAW, indicating a lower degree of inflammatory responses. Proteases may
play a role in the anti-P. aeruginosa humoral response in the upper and LAW, and 
anti-P. aeruginosa IgG may be involved in the crosstalk between upper and lower
airways in cystic fibrosis patients.

© 2020 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

DOI: 10.1002/ppul.24671 
PMID: 32022432  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

