
1. Int J Nanomedicine. 2020 Jan 15;15:169-179. doi: 10.2147/IJN.S176737. eCollection
2020.

Novel Silver-Platinum Nanoparticles for Anticancer and Antimicrobial
Applications.

López Ruiz A(1), Bartomeu Garcia C(2), Navarro Gallón S(2)(3), Webster TJ(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Chemical Engineering, Universitat Rovira i Virgili, Tarragona,
Spain.
(2)Department of Chemical Engineering, Northeastern University, Boston, MA, USA.
(3)Facultad de Ciencias Exactas y Naturales, Universidad de Antioquia, Medellin, 
Colombia.

Background: Cancer is a disease with an enormous worldwide impact. One of the
fatal complications in cancer patients are bacterial opportunistic infections.
The use of chemotherapeutic drugs made cancer remission more frequent and
prolonged patient survival, but, increased the risk of infections.
Purpose: Address the current problem with growing pandemic cancer and considering
high risks of complications with bacterial infections, the present study
synthesized novel dendritic assembly of silver (Ag)-platinum (Pt) nanoparticles.
Methods: Nanoparticles were characterized by TEM analysis, and the composition
was confirmed by EDX. Bacterial studies were performed for Gram-positive
Staphylococcus aureus, Gram-negative Pseudomonas aeruginosa and Gram-negative
multi-drug resistant Escherichia coli. Cell experiments were performed with two
different cancer cell lines, glioblastoma and melanoma to determine anticancer
activity. Finally, cytotoxicity with fibroblast was tested.
Results: The TEM analysis of silver-platinum (AgPt) nanoparticles showed
dendrimer shape nanoparticles with a mean size of 42 ± 11nm. Elemental
composition was analyzed by EDX, confirming the presence of both Ag and Pt
metals. The synthesized nanoparticles significantly inhibited the growth of
medically important pathogenic, Gram-positive Staphylococcus aureus,
Gram-negative Pseudomonas aeruginosa and Gram-negative multi-drug resistant
Escherichia coli. Bactericidal effect of AgPt nanoparticles had greater
effectiveness than silver nanoparticles. MTS assay revealed a selective and
dose-dependent anticancer activity of AgPt nanoparticles over cancer cell lines
glioblastoma and melanoma in the 10-250 µg/mL concentration range. Cytotoxicity
experiments with fibroblast cells showed no side effects of nanoparticles against
healthy cells at a range of concentrations from 10-50 µg/mL.
Conclusion: The newly synthesized AgPt nanoparticles have a promising future as a
potent anticancer agent with antibacterial properties.

© 2020 López Ruiz et al.

DOI: 10.2147/IJN.S176737 
PMCID: PMC6970512
PMID: 32021172  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Miss Aida Lopez Ruiz reports a patent (The
nanoparticles have patent pending from Northeastern University)
19815-473-INV17097. The authors declare no other competing interests in this
work.

