
1. J Prosthet Dent. 2021 Jan;125(1):165-174. doi: 10.1016/j.prosdent.2019.11.024.
Epub 2020 Feb 7.

Biological and physicochemical implications of the aging process on titanium and 
zirconia implant material surfaces.

da Rocha JFSS(1), de Avila ED(2), Rigolin MSM(3), Barbugli PA(4), Marin DOM(5),
Mollo Junior FA(6), Jorge JH(6).

Author information: 
(1)Masters graduate, Department of Dental Materials and Prosthodontics, School of
Dentistry at Araraquara, São Paulo State University (UNESP), Araraquara, Brazil.
(2)Postdoctoral Research Fellow, Department of Dental Materials and
Prosthodontics, School of Dentistry at Araraquara, São Paulo State University
(UNESP), Araraquara, Brazil. Electronic address: erica.fobusp@yahoo.com.br.
(3)Postdoctoral Research Fellow, Department of Dental Materials and
Prosthodontics, School of Dentistry at Araraquara, São Paulo State University
(UNESP), Araraquara, Brazil.
(4)Technical Assistant, Department of Dental Materials and Prosthodontics, School
of Dentistry at Araraquara, São Paulo State University (UNESP), Araraquara,
Brazil.
(5)Assistant Professor, Department of Dentistry, Federal University of Santa
Catarina (UFSC), Florianópolis, Brazil.
(6)Associate Professor, Department of Dental Materials and Prosthodontics, School
of Dentistry at Araraquara, São Paulo State University (UNESP), Araraquara,
Brazil.

STATEMENT OF PROBLEM: Changes in physicochemical properties because of implant
material aging and natural deterioration in the oral environment can facilitate
microbial colonization and disturb the soft-tissue seal between the implant
surfaces.
PURPOSE: The purpose of this in vitro study was to investigate the effect of
aging time on the physicochemical profile of titanium (Ti) and zirconia (ZrO2)
implant materials. Further microbiology and cell analyses were used to provide
insights into the physicochemical implications of biological behavior.
MATERIAL AND METHODS: Disk-shaped specimens of Ti and ZrO2 were submitted to
roughness, morphology, and surface free energy (SFE) analyses before nonaging
(NA) and after the aging process (A). To simulate natural aging, disks were
subjected to low-temperature degradation (LTD) by using an autoclave at 134 ºC
and 0.2 MPa pressure for 20 hours. The biological activities of the Ti and ZrO2
surfaces were determined by analyzing Candida albicans (C. albicans) biofilms and
human gingival fibroblast (HGF) cell proliferation. For the microbiology assays, 
a variance analysis method (ANOVA) was used with the Tukey post hoc test. For the
evaluation of cellular proliferation, the Kruskal-Wallis test followed by Dunn
multiple comparisons were used.
RESULTS: Ti nonaging (TNA) and ZrO2 nonaging (ZNA) disks displayed hydrophilic
and lipophilic properties, and this effect was sustained after the aging process.
Low-temperature degradation resulted in a modest change in intermolecular
interaction, with 1.06-fold for TA and 1.10-fold for ZA. No difference in biofilm
formation was observed between NA and A disks of the same material. After 48
hours, the viability of the attached HGF cells was very similar to that in the NA
and A groups, regardless of the tested material.
CONCLUSION: The changes in the physicochemical properties of Ti and ZrO2 induced 
by the aging process do not interfere with C. albicans biofilm formation and HGF 
cell attachment, even after long-term exposure.

Copyright © 2020 Editorial Council for the Journal of Prosthetic Dentistry.
Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.prosdent.2019.11.024 
PMID: 32037296  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

