
1. BMC Genomics. 2020 Feb 14;21(1):161. doi: 10.1186/s12864-020-6574-4.

Comparative milk proteome analysis of Kashmiri and Jersey cattle identifies
differential expression of key proteins involved in immune system regulation and 
milk quality.

Bhat SA(1), Ahmad SM(2), Ibeagha-Awemu EM(3), Mobashir M(4), Dar MA(1), Mumtaz
PT(1), Shah RA(1), Dar TA(5), Shabir N(1), Bhat HF(1), Ganai NA(6).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Animal Biotechnology, Faculty of Veterinary Sciences and Animal
Husbandry, SKUAST-Kashmir, Srinagar, India.
(2)Division of Animal Biotechnology, Faculty of Veterinary Sciences and Animal
Husbandry, SKUAST-Kashmir, Srinagar, India. mudasirbio@gmail.com.
(3)Agriculture and Agri-Food Canada, Sherbrooke Research and Development Centre, 
Sherbrooke, Quebec, Canada.
(4)Department of Microbiology, Tumor and Cell Biology (MTC), Karolinska
Institute, Novels väg 16, 17165 Solna, Stockholm, Sweden.
(5)Department of Clinical Biochemistry, University of Kashmir, Srinagar, J & K,
India.
(6)Division of Animal Genetics and Breeding, Faculty of Veterinary Sciences and
Animal Husbandry, SKUAST-Kashmir, Srinagar, India.

BACKGROUND: Exploration of the bioactive components of bovine milk has gained
global interest due to their potential applications in human nutrition and health
promotion. Despite advances in proteomics profiling, limited studies have been
carried out to fully characterize the bovine milk proteome. This study explored
the milk proteome of Jersey and Kashmiri cattle at day 90 of lactation using
high-resolution mass spectrometry based quantitative proteomics nano-scale
LC-MS/Q-TOF technique. Data are available via ProteomeXchange with identifier
PXD017412.
RESULTS: Proteins from whey were fractionated by precipitation into high and low 
abundant proteins. A total of 81 high-abundant and 99 low-abundant proteins were 
significantly differentially expressed between Kashmiri and Jersey cattle,
clearly differentiating the two breeds at the proteome level. Among the top
differentiating proteins, the Kashmiri cattle milk proteome was characterised by 
increased concentrations of immune-related proteins (apelin, acid glycoprotein,
CD14 antigen), neonatal developmental protein (probetacellulin), xenobiotic
metabolising enzyme (flavin monooxygenase 3 (FMO3), GLYCAM1 and HSP90AA1
(chaperone) while the Jersey milk proteome presented higher concentrations of
enzyme modulators (SERPINA1, RAC1, serine peptidase inhibitor) and hydrolases
(LTF, LPL, CYM, PNLIPRP2). Pathway analysis in Kashmiri cattle revealed
enrichment of key pathways involved in the regulation of mammary gland
development like Wnt signalling pathway, EGF receptor signalling pathway and FGF 
signalling pathway while a pathway (T-cell activation pathway) associated with
immune system regulation was significantly enriched in Jersey cattle. Most
importantly, the high-abundant FMO3 enzyme with an observed 17-fold higher
expression in Kashmiri cattle milk seems to be a characteristic feature of the
breed. The presence of this (FMO3) bioactive peptide/enzyme in Kashmiri cattle
could be economically advantageous for milk products from Kashmiri cattle.
CONCLUSION: In conclusion, this is the first study to provide insights not only
into the milk proteome differences between Kashmiri and Jersey cattle but also
provides potential directions for application of specific milk proteins from
Kashmiri cattle in special milk preparations like infant formula.

DOI: 10.1186/s12864-020-6574-4 
PMCID: PMC7023774
PMID: 32059637  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

