
1. Am J Transl Res. 2020 Jan 15;12(1):118-129. eCollection 2020.

Clinical significance of various growth factors in patients with different
gastric neoplasms.

Kędzierska L(1), Madej-Michniewicz A(1), Marczuk N(2), Dołęgowska B(2),
Starzyńska T(1), Błogowski W(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Gastroenterology, Pomeranian Medical University in Szczecin
Poland.
(2)Department of Microbiology, Immunology and Laboratory Medicine, Pomeranian
Medical University in Szczecin Poland.
(3)Department of Internal Medicine, University of Zielona Góra Poland.

Growth factors represent a family of important biological molecules that can also
be critical in the pathogenesis of various gastrointestinal cancers. In this
study, we conducted a comprehensive analysis of the systemic levels of selected
growth factors - hepatocyte, vascular-endothelial, fibroblast, and insulin-like 1
growth factors (HGF, VEGF, FGF, and IGF-1, respectively), as well as
granulocyte-colony stimulating factor (G-CSF) in 75 patients with different
gastric neoplasms (carcinomas, gastrointestinal stromal tumors - GISTs,
neuroendocrine neoplasms - NENs, and lymphomas) and 40 healthy volunteers.
Patients with gastric carcinoma or other types of gastric neoplasms had higher
HGF and IGF-1 levels than healthy individuals (P < 0.05 in all cases). In
comparison to healthy control subjects, systemic VEGF concentrations were
elevated in patients with gastric carcinoma (P < 0.05), but not in individuals
with other types of gastric malignancies. No statistically significant
differences were observed between the analyzed groups in terms of FGF and G-CSF
levels. When patients with gastric carcinoma were subdivided according to the
Japanese classification system, significantly elevated levels of HGF, VEGF, and
IGF-1 concentrations were observed in patients with advanced gastric carcinoma
(extending beyond the submucosal layer of the stomach). Only the systemic levels 
of HGF were associated with tumor node metastasis - TNM staging, the absolute
numbers of bone marrow-derived mesenchymal cells, and very small
embryonic/epiblast-like stem cells circulating in patients with gastric
carcinoma. ROC curves analyses demonstrated that AUC values of systemic levels of
examined growth factors ranged from 0.40-0.65 (P > 0.06 in all cases). In
conclusion, patients with gastric malignancies showed a systemic biochemical
imbalance in multiple growth factors, which appears to be associated with
clinical presentation of these neoplasms in humans. However, none of the growth
factors examined here seem to be suitable diagnostic biomarkers for detecting or 
differentiating different types of gastric malignancies in humans.

AJTR Copyright © 2020.


PMCID: PMC7013217
PMID: 32051741 

Conflict of interest statement: None.

