
1. Elife. 2020 Feb 18;9. pii: e51546. doi: 10.7554/eLife.51546.

Plasmodium-infected erythrocytes induce secretion of IGFBP7 to form type II
rosettes and escape phagocytosis.

Lee WC(1), Russell B(2), Sobota RM(3)(4), Ghaffar K(1), Howland SW(1), Wong
ZX(1), Maier AG(5), Dorin-Semblat D(6)(7), Biswas S(1), Gamain B(6)(7), Lau
YL(8), Malleret B(1)(9), Chu C(10)(11), Nosten F(10)(11), Renia L(1).

Author information: 
(1)Singapore Immunology Network (SIgN), Agency for Science, Technology and
Research (A*STAR), Singapore, Singapore.
(2)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, University of Otago, Dunedin, New
Zealand.
(3)Systems Structural Biology Group, Institute of Molecular and Cell Biology
(IMCB), Agency for Science, Technology and Research (A*STAR), Singapore,
Singapore.
(4)Institute of Medical Biology (IMB) Agency for Science, Technology and Research
(A*STAR), Singapore, Singapore.
(5)Biomedical Sciences and Biochemistry, Research School of Biology, Australian
National University, Canberra, Australia.
(6)Université de Paris, Biologie Intégrée du Globule Rouge, UMR_S1134, BIGR,
INSERM, Paris, France.
(7)Institut National de la Transfusion Sanguine, Paris, France.
(8)Department of Parasitology, Faculty of Medicine, University of Malaya, Kuala
Lumpur, Malaysia.
(9)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, Yong Loo Lin School of Medicine,
National University of Singapore, Singapore, Singapore.
(10)Shoklo Malaria Research Unit, Mahidol-Oxford Tropical Medicine Research Unit,
Faculty of Tropical Medicine, Mahidol University, Mae Sot, Thailand.
(11)Centre for Tropical Medicine, Nuffield Department of Medicine, University of 
Oxford, Oxford, United Kingdom.

In malaria, rosetting is described as a phenomenon where an infected erythrocyte 
(IRBC) is attached to uninfected erythrocytes (URBC). In some studies, rosetting 
has been associated with malaria pathogenesis. Here, we have identified a new
type of rosetting. Using a step-by-step approach, we identified IGFBP7, a protein
secreted by monocytes in response to parasite stimulation, as a
rosette-stimulator for Plasmodium falciparum- and P. vivax-IRBC. IGFBP7-mediated 
rosette-stimulation was rapid yet reversible. Unlike type I rosetting that
involves direct interaction of rosetting ligands on IRBC and receptors on URBC,
the IGFBP7-mediated, type II rosetting requires two additional serum factors,
namely von Willebrand factor and thrombospondin-1. These two factors interact
with IGFBP7 to mediate rosette formation by the IRBC. Importantly, the
IGFBP7-induced type II rosetting hampers phagocytosis of IRBC by host phagocytes.

plain-language-summary: Malaria is a life-threatening disease transmitted by
mosquitoes infected with Plasmodium parasites. Part of the parasite life cycle
happens inside human red blood cells. The surface of an infected red blood cell
is coated with parasite proteins, which attract the attention of white blood
cells called monocytes. These immune cells circulate in the bloodstream and use a
process called phagocytosis to essentially 'eat' any infected cells they
encounter. However, the monocytes cannot always reach the infected cells. Some of
the proteins made by the parasites make the infected red blood cells stickier
than normal. This allows the infected red blood cells to surround themselves in a
protective cage of uninfected red blood cells. Known as “rosettes” because of
their flower-like shape, these cages seem to protect the infected cells from
attack by the immune system. Lee et al. noticed that adding white blood cells to 
parasite-infected red blood cells made them clump together more, but it was
unclear exactly how and why this happened. To find out, Lee et al. took fluid
from around monocytes grown in the laboratory and added it to red blood cells
infected with Plasmodium parasites. This made the cells clump together,
suggesting that something in the fluid may potentially be alerting the parasites 
to impending immune attack. The fluid contained almost 700 different molecules,
and Lee et al. narrowed down their investigations to the five most likely
candidates. Interfering with the activities of these five proteins revealed that 
one – a protein IGFBP7 – not only alerted the parasites but also helped them to
form the rosettes. It turns out that the parasites appear to use IGFBP7 like a
bridge, linking it to two other human proteins to stick red blood cells together.
Once the rosettes had formed, the monocytes were unable to eat the infected blood
cells by themselves. Instead several monocytes had to work together as a team to 
consume the whole rosette. Further research is now needed to shed light on this
interaction between malaria parasites and human cells. Such research would be
particularly relevant in the clinical setting, since some previous studies has
linked the forming of rosettes to the severity of disease for malaria.
© 2020, Lee et al.

DOI: 10.7554/eLife.51546 
PMCID: PMC7048393
PMID: 32066522 

Conflict of interest statement: WL, BR, RS, KG, SH, ZW, AM, DD, SB, BG, YL, BM,
CC, FN, LR No competing interests declared

