
1. Appl Environ Microbiol. 2020 Apr 17;86(9). pii: e02388-19. doi:
10.1128/AEM.02388-19. Print 2020 Apr 17.

Inhibition of Ammonia Monooxygenase from Ammonia-Oxidizing Archaea by Linear and 
Aromatic Alkynes.

Wright CL(1), Schatteman A(1), Crombie AT(1), Murrell JC(2), Lehtovirta-Morley
LE(3).

Author information: 
(1)School of Biological Sciences, University of East Anglia, Norwich, United
Kingdom.
(2)School of Environmental Sciences, University of East Anglia, Norwich, United
Kingdom.
(3)School of Biological Sciences, University of East Anglia, Norwich, United
Kingdom l.lehtovirta-morley@uea.ac.uk.

Ammonia monooxygenase (AMO) is a key nitrogen-transforming enzyme belonging to
the same copper-dependent membrane monooxygenase family (CuMMO) as the
particulate methane monooxygenase (pMMO). The AMO from ammonia-oxidizing archaea 
(AOA) is very divergent from both the AMO of ammonia-oxidizing bacteria (AOB) and
the pMMO from methanotrophs, and little is known about the structure or substrate
range of the archaeal AMO. This study compares inhibition by C2 to C8 linear
1-alkynes of AMO from two phylogenetically distinct strains of AOA, "Candidatus
Nitrosocosmicus franklandus" C13 and "Candidatus Nitrosotalea sinensis" Nd2, with
AMO from Nitrosomonas europaea and pMMO from Methylococcus capsulatus (Bath). An 
increased sensitivity of the archaeal AMO to short-chain-length alkynes (≤C5)
appeared to be conserved across AOA lineages. Similarities in C2 to C8 alkyne
inhibition profiles between AMO from AOA and pMMO from M. capsulatus suggested
that the archaeal AMO has a narrower substrate range than N. europaea AMO.
Inhibition of AMO from "Ca Nitrosocosmicus franklandus" and N. europaea by the
aromatic alkyne phenylacetylene was also investigated. Kinetic data revealed that
the mechanisms by which phenylacetylene inhibits "Ca Nitrosocosmicus franklandus"
and N. europaea are different, indicating differences in the AMO active site
between AOA and AOB. Phenylacetylene was found to be a specific and irreversible 
inhibitor of AMO from "Ca Nitrosocosmicus franklandus," and it does not compete
with NH3 for binding at the active site.IMPORTANCE Archaeal and bacterial ammonia
oxidizers (AOA and AOB, respectively) initiate nitrification by oxidizing ammonia
to hydroxylamine, a reaction catalyzed by ammonia monooxygenase (AMO). AMO enzyme
is difficult to purify in its active form, and its structure and biochemistry
remain largely unexplored. The bacterial AMO and the closely related particulate 
methane monooxygenase (pMMO) have a broad range of hydrocarbon cooxidation
substrates. This study provides insights into the AMO of previously unstudied
archaeal genera, by comparing the response of the archaeal AMO, a bacterial AMO, 
and pMMO to inhibition by linear 1-alkynes and the aromatic alkyne,
phenylacetylene. Reduced sensitivity to inhibition by larger alkynes suggests
that the archaeal AMO has a narrower hydrocarbon substrate range than the
bacterial AMO, as previously reported for other genera of AOA. Phenylacetylene
inhibited the archaeal and bacterial AMOs at different thresholds and by
different mechanisms of inhibition, highlighting structural differences between
the two forms of monooxygenase.

Copyright © 2020 Wright et al.

DOI: 10.1128/AEM.02388-19 
PMCID: PMC7170481
PMID: 32086308  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

