
1. J Ethnopharmacol. 2020 May 23;254:112669. doi: 10.1016/j.jep.2020.112669. Epub
2020 Feb 20.

Callistemon citrinus bioactive metabolites as new inhibitors of
methicillin-resistant Staphylococcus aureus biofilm formation.

Shehabeldine AM(1), Ashour RM(2), Okba MM(3), Saber FR(4).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Botany and Microbiology, Faculty of Science (Boys), Al-Azhar
University, Nasr City, Cairo, 11884, Egypt. Electronic address:
dramrshehab@azhar.edu.eg.
(2)Department of Pharmacognosy, Faculty of Pharmacy, Cairo University, Kasr
el-Aini street, Cairo, 11562, Egypt. Electronic address:
rehab.ashour@pharma.cu.edu.eg.
(3)Department of Pharmacognosy, Faculty of Pharmacy, Cairo University, Kasr
el-Aini street, Cairo, 11562, Egypt. Electronic address:
mona.morad@pharma.cu.edu.eg.
(4)Department of Pharmacognosy, Faculty of Pharmacy, Cairo University, Kasr
el-Aini street, Cairo, 11562, Egypt. Electronic address:
fatema.saber@pharma.cu.edu.eg.

ETHNOPHARMACOLOGICAL RELEVANCE: The development of new inhibitors of bacterial
virulence factors from natural origin has recently received significant
attention. Callistemon citrinus Skeels is an important plant of great medicinal
value. Its antimicrobial activity is well documented. Although several compounds 
were isolated from this plant, the actual bioactive compounds responsible for its
antimicrobial activity are still unrevealed.
AIM OF THE STUDY: To evaluate the effect of C. citrinus crude extract and
isolated compounds on methicillin-resistant and sensitive Staphylococcus aureus.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: The methylene chloride-methanol extract (MME) of
C. citrinus leaves was prepared by Soxhlet apparatus. Biologically guided
fractionation of MME was accomplished using several normal and reversed phase
silica gel columns. The potency of MME and its isolated compounds against
methicillin-resistant Staphylococcus aureus (MRSA) and methicillin-sensitive
S. aureus (MSSA) was evaluated. In addition, the mechanism of resistance was
studied using three virulence factors; antibiofilm activity, inhibition of
staphyloxanthin biosynthesis and effect on acid tolerance. Ultrastructural
changes in MRSA and MSSA were observed by TEM to understand mode of action of
these compounds.
RESULTS: Pulverulentone A (C1), 8- desmethyl eucalyptin (C2) and eucalyptin (C3) 
were isolated from the most bioactive fraction of MME. Confocal scanning laser
microscopy images revealed that C. citrinus isolated compounds destroyed the
intact architecture of biofilm, thickness and reduced its biomass. Pulverulentone
A (C1) showed the most potent anti-biofilm activity up to 71% and 62.3% against
MRSA and MSSA, respectively. It also exhibited the highest inhibition of
staphyloxanthin biosynthesis of MRSA and MSSA by 55.6% and 54.5%, respectively.
The bacterial cell membrane was compromised, losing its integrity and releasing
important cellular constituents when exposed to C1-C3 CONCLUSIONS: C. citrinus
phenolics and acylphloroglucinols may serve as potential source of plant-based
antibacterials and thus could be implicated to control MRSA biofilm formation.

Copyright © 2020. Published by Elsevier B.V.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jep.2020.112669 
PMID: 32087316  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of competing interest The authors
report no conflicts of interest.

