
1. J Infect Dev Ctries. 2019 Dec 31;13(12):1159-1164. doi: 10.3855/jidc.11815.

Vaccination campaign strategies in recently arrived migrants: experience of an
Italian reception centre.

Vita S(1), Sinopoli MT(2), Fontanelli Sulekova L(3), Morucci L(4), Lopalco M(5), 
Spaziante M(6), Pacifici LE(7), Bazzardi R(8), Angeletti S(9), Ciccozzi M(10),
Ceccarelli G(11).

Author information: 
(1)Migrant and global Health Research Organization (Mi-HeRO), Rome, Italy.
serena.vita@gmail.com.
(2)Local Public Health Unit ASL Roma 4, Latium Region, Rome, Italy.
mariateresa.sinopoli@aslroma4.it.
(3)Migrant and global Health Research Organization (Mi-HeRO), Rome, Italy.
lucia.sulekova@gmail.com.
(4)Department of Biomedicine and Prevention, Tor Vergata University, Rome, Italy.
lucamorucci88@gmail.com.
(5)Sanitary Bureau of Asylum Seekers Centre of Castelnuovo di Porto, Rome, Italy.
maurizio.lopalco@gmail.com.
(6)Department of Public Health and Infectious Diseases, Sapienza University of
Rome, Rome, Italy. martinaspaziante@hotmail.com.
(7)UniCamillus - Saint Camillus International University of Health Sciences,
Rome, Italy. lepacifici@hotmail.com.
(8)Microbiology Laboratory, Experimental Zooprophylactic Institute of Sardinia
"G.Pegreffi", Sassari, Italy. riccardo.bazzardi@izs-sardegna.it.
(9)Clinical Pathology and Microbiology Laboratory, University Hospital Campus
Bio-Medico of Rome, Italy. S.Angeletti@unicampus.it.
(10)Unit of Medical Statistics and Molecular Epidemiology, University Campus
Bio-Medico of Rome, Italy. m.ciccozzi@unicampus.it.
(11)Migrant and global Health Research Organization (Mi-HeRO), Rome, Italy.
giancarlo.ceccarelli@uniroma1.it.

INTRODUCTION: Control of vaccine preventable diseases, while constituting a
priority of European health policies, is challenged by migrations from countries 
with suboptimal levels of immunization coverage. We report here two different
types of vaccination campaign strategy in one of the bigger Italian asylum
seekers' centres. The vaccination service staff of the local national health
institute came monthly during the first three years of observation, while in the 
last year, the vaccinations were offered directly upon arrival of migrants in the
asylum seekers' centre.
METHODOLOGY: we performed a descriptive cross-sectional study that analysed data 
collected from the database of the internal healthcare facility and ARVA Target
tool, regarding vaccinations performed from 2013 to 2017 in the asylum seekers'
centre.
RESULTS: In the four years of observation period the asylum seekers centre hosted
3941 migrants. Among them, 85% were vaccinated during their stay, for a total of 
4252 vaccinations administered, covering 95% of minors and 85% of adults. During 
the study period, there was an important increase from an average of 10.5% of
migrants vaccinated in the first three years to 66% in the last year, when
vaccines were delivered directly upon arrival in the centre.
CONCLUSIONS: To improve the rate of immunization in migrants, the first
requirement is a strong collaboration with the local vaccine services and the
second,vaccinations must be carried out when migrants arrive at the asylum
seekers' centre, avoiding any delay.

Copyright (c) 2019 Serena Vita, Maria Teresa Sinopoli, Lucia Fontanelli Sulekova,
Luca Morucci, Maurizio Lopalco, Martina Spaziante, Laura Elena Pacifici, Riccardi
Bazzardi, Silvia Angeletti, Massimo Ciccozzi, Giancarlo Ceccarelli.

DOI: 10.3855/jidc.11815 
PMID: 32088704  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: No Conflict of Interest is declared

