
1. G Ital Cardiol (Rome). 2020 Mar;21(3):228-241. doi: 10.1714/3306.32772.

[ANMCO/AIGO Intersocietary consensus document: Gastroprotection in patients
receiving antiplatelet and/or anticoagulant drugs].

[Article in Italian]

Abrignani MG(1), Zullo A(2), Gabrielli D(3), Milazzo G(4), De Francesco V(5), De 
Luca L(6), Francese M(7), Gatta L(8), Imazio M(9), Riccio E(10), Rossini R(11),
Scotto Di Uccio F(12), Soncini M(13), Colivicchi F(14), Di Lenarda A(15), Gulizia
MM(16), Monica F(17).

Author information: 
(1)U.O.C. Cardiologia, P.O. S. Antonio Abate, ASP Trapani, Erice (TP).
(2)U.O.C. Gastroenterologia, Ospedale Nuovo Regina Margherita, Roma.
(3)U.O.C. Cardiologia, Ospedale Civile Augusto Murri, Fermo.
(4)U.O.C. Medicina e Lungodegenza, Ospedale Vittorio Emanuele III, ASP Trapani,
Salemi (TP).
(5)U.O.C. Gastroenterologia, Azienda Mista Università-Ospedali Riuniti di Foggia.
(6)U.O.C. Cardiologia, Ospedale San Giovanni Evangelista, Tivoli (RM).
(7)U.O.C. Cardiologia, P.O. Garibaldi-Nesima, Catania.
(8)U.O.C. Gastroenterologia, Ospedale Versilia, Azienda USL Toscana Nord-Ovest.
(9)U.O.C. Cardiologia, A.O.U. Città della Salute e della Scienza, Torino.
(10)U.O.C. Gastroenterologia, A.O.R.N. A. Cardarelli, Napoli.
(11)U.O.C. Cardiologia, Azienda Ospedaliera Santa Croce e Carle, Cuneo.
(12)U.O.C. Cardiologia, Ospedale del Mare, Napoli.
(13)U.O.C. Medicina Generale, Ospedale A. Manzoni, ASST Lecco.
(14)U.O.C. Cardiologia, P.O. San Filippo Neri - ASL Roma 1, Roma.
(15)U.O.C. Cardiologia, ASUI di Trieste, Trieste.
(16)U.O.C. Cardiologia, P.O. Garibaldi-Nesima, Catania - Presidente Fondazione
per il Tuo cuore.
(17)U.O.C. Gastroenterologia, Ospedale Accademico Cattinara, Trieste.

Aspirin and P2Y12 receptor antagonists are widely used across the spectrum of
cardiovascular and cerebrovascular diseases. Gastrointestinal complications,
including ulcer and bleeding, are relatively common during antiplatelet treatment
and, therefore, concomitant proton pump inhibitor (PPI) treatment is often
prescribed. However, potential increased risk of cardiovascular events has been
suggested for PPIs, and, in recent years, it has been discussed whether these
drugs may reduce the cardiovascular protection by aspirin and, even more so,
clopidogrel. Indeed, pharmacodynamic and pharmacokinetic studies suggested an
interaction through CYP2C19 between PPIs and clopidogrel, which could translate
into clinical inefficacy, leading to higher rates of cardiovascular events. The
Food and Drug Administration and the European Medicines Agency sent a warning in 
2010 discouraging the concomitant use of clopidogrel with omeprazole or
esomeprazole. In addition, whether the use of PPIs may affect the clinical
efficacy of the new P2Y12 receptor antagonists, ticagrelor and prasugrel, remains
less known. According to current guidelines, PPIs in combination with
antiplatelet treatment are recommended in patients with risk factors for
gastrointestinal bleeding, including advanced age, concurrent use of
anticoagulants, steroids or non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs, and
Helicobacter pylori infection. Like traditional anticoagulants, novel oral
anticoagulants may cause gastrointestinal bleeding. Results from both randomized 
clinical trials and observational studies suggest that high-dose dabigatran (150 
mg bid), rivaroxaban and high-dose edoxaban (60 mg daily) are associated with a
higher risk of gastrointestinal bleeding as compared with warfarin. However, the 
usefulness of PPIs in patients receiving these anticoagulants deserves to be
further demonstrated. Given the large number of patients treated with
antithrombotic drugs and PPIs, even a minor reduction of platelet inhibition or
anticoagulant effect potentially carries a considerable clinical impact. The
present joint statement by ANMCO and AIGO summarizes the current knowledge
regarding the widespread use of platelet inhibitors, anticoagulants, and PPIs in 
combination. Moreover, it outlines evidence supporting or opposing drug
interactions between these drugs and discusses consequent clinical implications.

DOI: 10.1714/3306.32772 
PMID: 32100736  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

