
1. Cell Rep. 2020 Feb 25;30(8):2743-2757.e5. doi: 10.1016/j.celrep.2020.01.103.

Tumor-Derived Lactic Acid Contributes to the Paucity of Intratumoral ILC2s.

Wagner M(1), Ealey KN(2), Tetsu H(3), Kiniwa T(2), Motomura Y(4), Moro K(5),
Koyasu S(6).

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory for Immune Cell Systems, RIKEN Center for Integrative Medical
Sciences, Yokohama, Japan; Laboratory for Innate Immune Systems, RIKEN Center for
Integrative Medical Sciences, Yokohama, Japan; Department of Biomedicine,
University of Bergen, Bergen, Norway. Electronic address: marek.wagner@uib.no.
(2)Laboratory for Innate Immune Systems, RIKEN Center for Integrative Medical
Sciences, Yokohama, Japan.
(3)Laboratory for Innate Immune Systems, RIKEN Center for Integrative Medical
Sciences, Yokohama, Japan; Department of Medical Life Science, Graduate School of
Medical Life Science, Yokohama City University, Yokohama, Japan.
(4)Laboratory for Innate Immune Systems, RIKEN Center for Integrative Medical
Sciences, Yokohama, Japan; Laboratory for Innate Immune Systems, Department of
Microbiology and Immunology, Osaka University Graduate School of Medicine, Osaka,
Japan.
(5)Laboratory for Innate Immune Systems, RIKEN Center for Integrative Medical
Sciences, Yokohama, Japan; Department of Medical Life Science, Graduate School of
Medical Life Science, Yokohama City University, Yokohama, Japan; Laboratory for
Innate Immune Systems, Department of Microbiology and Immunology, Osaka
University Graduate School of Medicine, Osaka, Japan; Laboratory for Innate
Immune Systems, Immunology Frontier Research Center (IFReC), Osaka University
Graduate School of Medicine, Osaka, Japan.
(6)Laboratory for Immune Cell Systems, RIKEN Center for Integrative Medical
Sciences, Yokohama, Japan; Department of Microbiology and Immunology, Keio
University School of Medicine, Tokyo, Japan. Electronic address:
shigeo.koyasu@riken.jp.

Group 2 innate lymphoid cells (ILC2s) are abundant in non-lymphoid tissues and
increase following infectious and inflammatory insults. In solid tumors, however,
ILC2s constitute a relatively small proportion of immune cells. Here, we show,
using melanoma as a model, that while the IL-33/IL C2/eosinophil axis suppresses 
tumor growth, tumor-derived lactate attenuates the function and survival of
ILC2s. Melanomas with reduced lactate production (LDHAlow) are growth delayed and
typified by an increased number of ILC2s compared with control tumors. Upon IL-33
stimulation, ILC2s accompanied by eosinophils more effectively restrain the
growth of LDHAlow tumors than control melanomas. Furthermore, database analysis
reveals a negative correlation between the expression of LDHA and markers
associated with ILC2s and the association of high expression of IL33 and an
eosinophil marker SIGLEC8 with better overall survival in human cutaneous
melanoma patients. This work demonstrates that the balance between the
IL-33/ILC2/eosinophil axis and lactate production by tumor cells regulates
melanoma growth.

Copyright © 2020 The Author(s). Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.celrep.2020.01.103 
PMID: 32101749  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of Interests The authors declare no
competing interests.

