
1. Ecotoxicol Environ Saf. 2020 Apr 15;193:110348. doi:
10.1016/j.ecoenv.2020.110348. Epub 2020 Feb 27.

Evaluation of cytotoxicity, apoptosis, and genotoxicity induced by indium
chloride in macrophages through mitochondrial dysfunction and reactive oxygen
species generation.

Tsai PK(1), Wu SW(2), Chiang CY(3), Lee MW(4), Chen HY(5), Chen WY(6), Chen
CJ(7), Yang SF(8), Yeh CB(9), Kuan YH(10).

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Medicine, Chung Shan Medical University, Taichung, Taiwan;
Department of Internal Medicine, Zuoying Branch of Kaohsiung Armed Forces General
Hospital, Kaohsiung, Taiwan.
(2)Division of Nephrology, Chung Shan Medical University Hospital, Taichung,
Taiwan; The School of Medicine, Chung Shan Medical University, Taichung, Taiwan.
(3)Department of Pharmacology, School of Medicine, Chung Shan Medical University,
Taichung, Taiwan; Department of Pharmacy, Chung Shan Medical University Hospital,
Taichung, Taiwan; Department of Veterinary Medicine, National Chung Hsing
University, Taichung, Taiwan.
(4)Department of Pharmacology, School of Medicine, Chung Shan Medical University,
Taichung, Taiwan; Department of Pharmacy, Chung Shan Medical University Hospital,
Taichung, Taiwan; A Graduate Institute of Microbiology and Public Health,
National Chung Hsing University, Taichung, Taiwan.
(5)School of Pharmacy, China Medical University, Taichung, Taiwan.
(6)Department of Veterinary Medicine, National Chung Hsing University, Taichung, 
Taiwan.
(7)Department of Education and Research, Taichung Veterans General Hospital,
Taichung, Taiwan.
(8)Institute of Medicine, Chung Shan Medical University, Taichung, Taiwan;
Department of Medical Research, Chung Shan Medical University Hospital, Taichung,
Taiwan.
(9)Institute of Medicine, Chung Shan Medical University, Taichung, Taiwan; The
School of Medicine, Chung Shan Medical University, Taichung, Taiwan; Department
of Emergency Medicine, Chung Shan Medical University Hospital, Taichung, Taiwan.
(10)Department of Pharmacology, School of Medicine, Chung Shan Medical
University, Taichung, Taiwan; Department of Pharmacy, Chung Shan Medical
University Hospital, Taichung, Taiwan. Electronic address: kuanyh@csmu.edu.tw.

Due to rapid advances in the era of electronic technologies, indium has played
the important material for the production of liquid crystal display screens in
the semiconductor and optoelectronic industries. The present study focuses on
evaluating the toxic effects and related mechanisms of indium chloride (InCl3) on
RAW264.7 macrophages. Cytotoxicity was induced by InCl3 in a concentration- and
time-dependent manner. InCl3 had the ability to induce macrophage death through
apoptosis rather than through necrosis. According to the cytokinesis-block
micronucleus assay and alkaline single-cell gel electrophoresis assay, InCl3
induced DNA damage, also called genotoxicity, in a concentration-dependent
manner. Cysteine-dependent aspartate-directed protease (caspase)-3, -8, and -9
were activated by InCl3 in a concentration-dependent manner. Mitochondria
dysfunction and cytochrome c release from the mitochondria were induced by InCl3 
in a concentration-dependent manner. Downregulation of BCL2 and upregulation of
BAD were induced by InCl3 in a concentration-dependent manner. More, we proposed 
that InCl3 treatment generated reactive oxygen species (ROS) in a
concentration-dependent manner. In conclusion, the current study revealed that
InCl3 induced macrophage cytotoxicity, apoptosis, and genotoxicity via a
mitochondria-dependent apoptotic pathway and ROS generation.

Copyright © 2020 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ecoenv.2020.110348 
PMID: 32114240  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of competing interest All authors
declare no conflict of interest.

