
1. J Mol Graph Model. 2020 Jun;97:107575. doi: 10.1016/j.jmgm.2020.107575. Epub 2020
Feb 26.

Chromatin modification by olive phenolics: In silico molecular docking studies
utilising the phenolic groups categorised in the OliveNet™ database against
lysine specific demethylase enzymes.

Pitsillou E(1), Liang J(2), Hung A(3), Karagiannis TC(4).

Author information: 
(1)Epigenomic Medicine, Department of Diabetes, Central Clinical School, Monash
University, Prahran, VIC, 3004, Australia; Department of Microbiology and
Immunology (Pathology), The University of Melbourne, Parkville, VIC, 3052,
Australia.
(2)Epigenomic Medicine, Department of Diabetes, Central Clinical School, Monash
University, Prahran, VIC, 3004, Australia; School of Science, RMIT University,
VIC, 3001, Australia.
(3)School of Science, RMIT University, VIC, 3001, Australia.
(4)Epigenomic Medicine, Department of Diabetes, Central Clinical School, Monash
University, Prahran, VIC, 3004, Australia; Department of Clinical Pathology, The 
University of Melbourne, Parkville, VIC, 3052, Australia. Electronic address:
tom.karagiannis@monash.edu.

Extra virgin olive oil is the principal source of dietary fat in the
Mediterranean diet and is considered to have beneficial health effects. There is 
evidence to suggest that the phenolic compounds within Olea europaea have the
ability to inhibit lysine-specific demethylase 1 (LSD1). This is an epigenetic
enzyme that removes methyl groups from histone proteins and regulates gene
transcription. Conversely, SET domain-containing protein 7 (SETD7) has opposing
enzymatic activity and is a histone methyltransferase. Due to the involvement of 
these proteins in a number of pathological processes, including cancer and
diabetes, further research needs to be conducted into the way in which they can
be targeted. A large number of phenolic compounds (>200) have been identified in 
Olea europaea. To help expedite the discovery of promising lead compounds, in
this study, in silico molecular docking methods were used to investigate the
molecular binding properties of the phenolic compounds obtained from the
OliveNet™ database to LSD1 and its variants, LSD2, and SETD7. Numerous Olea
europaea phenolic compounds were predicted to bind to the epigenetic enzymes and 
several had stronger binding affinities than the LSD1 and SETD7 positive control 
inhibitors. The protein-ligand interactions of the phenolic compounds were also
compared to known inhibitors and the molecular docking results suggest that the
flavonoids, secoiridoids and glucosides may bind particularly strongly to the
epigenetic regulators. Overall, several ligands were identified as lead compounds
from this research and their potential inhibitory activity could be validated
further in the laboratory.

Copyright © 2020 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jmgm.2020.107575 
PMID: 32126499 

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of competing interest Although no
direct conflict of interest with respect to this article, the Epigenomic Medicine
Program (TCK) is supported financially by McCord Research (Iowa, USA), which has 
commercial interests in nutraceuticals, some of which may have been discussed in 
this article. The remaining co-authors have no conflicts of interest.

