
1. Probiotics Antimicrob Proteins. 2020 Dec;12(4):1409-1419. doi:
10.1007/s12602-020-09642-x.

The Effect of Lactobacillus casei Consumption in Improvement of
Obsessive-Compulsive Disorder: an Animal Study.

Sanikhani NS(1), Modarressi MH(2), Jafari P(3), Vousooghi N(4)(5), Shafei S(6),
Akbariqomi M(1), Heidari R(1), Lavasani PS(1), Yazarlou F(2), Motevaseli E(7),
Ghafouri-Fard S(8).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Medicine, School of Advanced Technologies in Medicine,
Tehran University of Medical Sciences, Tehran, Iran.
(2)Department of Medical Genetics, School of Medicine, Tehran University of
Medical Sciences, Tehran, Iran.
(3)Microbiology Department, Science faculty, Islamic Azad University, Arak
branch, Arak, Iran.
(4)Department of Neuroscience and Addiction Studies, School of Advanced
Technologies in Medicine, Tehran University of Medical Sciences, Tehran, Iran.
(5)Research Center for Cognitive and Behavioral Sciences, Tehran University of
Medical Sciences, Tehran, Iran.
(6)Department of Molecular Medicine, School of Advanced Technologies in Medicine,
International Campus Tehran University of Medical Sciences, Tehran, Iran.
(7)Department of Molecular Medicine, School of Advanced Technologies in Medicine,
Tehran University of Medical Sciences, Tehran, Iran. e_motevaseli@tums.ac.ir.
(8)Department of Medical Genetics, Shahid Beheshti University of Medical
Sciences, Tehran, Iran. s.ghafourifard@sbmu.ac.ir.

Obsessive-compulsive disorder (OCD) is an important neuropsychiatric disorder
worldwide. Common treatments of OCD include serotonergic antidepressants, which
can cause potentially serious side effects. We assessed the effects of
Lactobacillus casei (L. casei) Shirota consumption in an animal model of OCD.
OCD-like symptoms were induced in rats by the chronic injection of the D2/D3
dopamine agonist quinpirole hydrochloride. Rats were classified into five groups 
of 6 rats. Four groups were injected chronically with quinpirole (0.5 mg/kg,
twice weekly for 5 weeks). They were fed with L. casei Shirota (109 CF/g, daily
for 4 weeks) (group 1), fluoxetine (10 mg/kg, daily for 4 weeks) (group 2),
combination of L. casei Shirota and fluoxetine (group 3), and normal saline
(positive control group). The last group did not receive dopamine agonist and was
only injected with saline (negative control group). Expression levels of
brain-derived neurotrophic factor (Bdnf), solute carrier family 6 member 4
(Slc6a4), and 5-hydroxytryptamine receptor type 2A (Htr2a) were assessed in
orbitofrontal cortex tissues of all rats. Behavioral tests showed improvement of 
OCD signs in rats treated with L. casei Shirota, fluoxetine, and a combination of
drugs. Quantitative PCR analysis showed a remarkable decrease in the expression
of Bdnf and an increase in the expression of Htr2a in quinpirole-treated rats.
After treatment with L. casei Shirota and fluoxetine, the expression level of
Bdnf was increased remarkably, whereas Htr2a expression was decreased. The
current study showed the effectiveness of L. casei Shirota in the treatment of
OCD in a rat model. The beneficial effects of this probiotic are possibly exerted
through the modulation of serotonin-related genes expression.

DOI: 10.1007/s12602-020-09642-x 
PMID: 32124236 

