
1. EMBO J. 2020 Apr 1;39(7):e103255. doi: 10.15252/embj.2019103255. Epub 2020 Mar 4.

Secreted stromal protein ISLR promotes intestinal regeneration by suppressing
epithelial Hippo signaling.

Xu J(#)(1)(2), Tang Y(#)(3)(4), Sheng X(1), Tian Y(1), Deng M(1), Du S(1), Lv
C(1)(2), Li G(1), Pan Y(1), Song Y(1), Lou P(1), Luo Y(5), Li Y(5), Zhang B(6),
Chen Y(7), Liu Z(8), Cong Y(9), Plikus MV(10), Meng Q(1), Zhou Z(3)(11), Yu Z(1).

Author information: 
(1)State Key Laboratories for Agrobiotechnology and Beijing Advanced Innovation
Center for Food Nutrition and Human Health, College of Biological Sciences, China
Agricultural University, Beijing, China.
(2)Guangdong Provincial Key Laboratory of Regional Immunity and School of
Medicine, Shenzhen University, Shenzhen, China.
(3)State Key Laboratories of Cell Biology, CAS Center for Excellence in Molecular
Cell Science, Shanghai Institute of Biochemistry and Cell Biology, Chinese
Academy of Sciences, University of Chinese Academy of Sciences, Shanghai, China.
(4)Postdoctoral Station of Clinical Medicine, Shanghai Tenth Peoples Hospital,
Tongji University School of Medicine, Shanghai, China.
(5)Beijing Advanced Innovation Center for Food Nutrition and Human Health,
College of Food Science and Nutritional Engineering, China Agricultural
University, Beijing, China.
(6)College of Veterinary Medicine, China Agricultural University, Beijing, China.
(7)State Key Laboratory of Plant Physiology and Biochemistry, College of
Biological Sciences, China Agricultural University, Beijing, China.
(8)Department of Gastroenterology, The Shanghai Tenth People's Hospital, Tongji
University, Shanghai, China.
(9)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, University of Texas Medical Branch,
Galveston, TX, USA.
(10)Department of Developmental and Cell Biology, Sue and Bill Gross Stem Cell
Research center, Center for Complex Biological Systems, University of California,
Irvine, Irvine, CA, USA.
(11)Department of Medical Ultrasound, Shanghai Tenth People's Hospital,
Ultrasound Research and Education Institute, Tongji University School of
Medicine, Shanghai, China.
(#)Contributed equally

The Hippo-YAP signaling pathway plays an essential role in epithelial cells
during intestinal regeneration and tumorigenesis. However, the molecular
mechanism linking stromal signals to YAP-mediated intestinal regeneration and
tumorigenesis is poorly defined. Here, we report a stroma-epithelium ISLR-YAP
signaling axis essential for stromal cells to modulate epithelial cell growth
during intestinal regeneration and tumorigenesis. Specifically, upon inflammation
and in cancer, an oncogenic transcription factor ETS1 in stromal cells induces
expression of a secreted protein ISLR that can inhibit Hippo signaling and
activate YAP in epithelial cells. Deletion of Islr in stromal cells in mice
markedly impaired intestinal regeneration and suppressed tumorigenesis in the
colon. Moreover, the expression of stromal cell-specific ISLR and ETS1
significantly increased in inflamed mucosa of human IBD patients and in human
colorectal adenocarcinoma, accounting for the epithelial YAP hyperactivation.
Collectively, our findings provide new insights into the signaling crosstalk
between stroma and epithelium during tissue regeneration and tumorigenesis.

© 2020 The Authors.

DOI: 10.15252/embj.2019103255 
PMCID: PMC7110107
PMID: 32128839  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

