
1. Thromb Haemost. 2020 Mar;120(3):423-436. doi: 10.1055/s-0040-1702229. Epub 2020
Mar 5.

Plasma Protein Signatures of a Murine Venous Thrombosis Model and Slc44a2
Knockout Mice Using Quantitative-Targeted Proteomics.

Tilburg J(1), Michaud SA(2), Maracle CX(1), Versteeg HH(1), Borchers CH(2)(3)(4),
van Vlijmen BJM(1), Mohammed Y(2)(5)(6).

Author information: 
(1)Einthoven Laboratory for Vascular and Regenerative Medicine, Division of
Thrombosis and Hemostasis, Department of Internal Medicine, Leiden University
Medical Center, Leiden, The Netherlands.
(2)UVic-Genome British Columbia Proteomics Centre, Department of Biochemistry and
Microbiology, University of Victoria, Victoria, BC, Canada.
(3)Molecular Pathology, Jewish General Hospital Proteomics Centre, Lady Davis
Institute, McGill University, Montreal, QC, Canada.
(4)Department of Biochemistry and Microbiology, University of Victoria, Victoria,
BC, Canada.
(5)Division of Medical Sciences, University of Victoria, Victoria, BC, Canada.
(6)Center for Proteomics and Metabolomics, Leiden University Medical Center,
Leiden, The Netherlands.

Comment in
    Thromb Haemost. 2020 Mar;120(3):372.

The plasma compartment of the blood holds important information on the risk to
develop cardiovascular diseases such as venous thrombosis (VT). Mass
spectrometry-based targeted proteomics with internal standards quantifies
proteins in multiplex allowing generation of signatures associated with a disease
or a condition. Here, to demonstrate the method, we investigate the plasma
protein signatures in mice following the onset of VT, which was induced by RNA
interference targeting the natural anticoagulants antithrombin and protein C. We 
then study mice lacking Slc44a2, which was recently characterized as a
VT-susceptibility gene in human genome-wide association studies. We use a
recently developed panel of 375 multiplexed mouse protein assays measured by mass
spectrometry. A strong plasma protein siganture was observed when VT was induced.
Discriminators included acute phase response proteins, and proteins related to
erythrocyte function. In mice lacking Slc44a2, protein signature was primarily
overruled by the difference between sexes and not by the absent gene. Upon
separate analyses for males and females, we were able to establish a signature
for Slc44a2 deficiency, in which glycosylation-dependent cell adhesion molecule-1
and thrombospondin-1 were shared by both sexes. The minimal impact of Slc44a2
deficiency on the measured plasma proteins suggests that the main effect of
Slc44a2 on VT does not lay ultimately in the plasma compartment. This suggests
further investigation into the role of this VT-susceptibility gene should perhaps
also question the possible involvement in cellular mechanisms.

Georg Thieme Verlag KG Stuttgart · New York.

DOI: 10.1055/s-0040-1702229 
PMID: 32135565  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: J.T., C.X.M., H.H.V. and B.J.M.V.V. report grants
from Trombosestichting Nederland, grants from Landsteiner Foundation for Blood
Transfusion Research, during the conduct of the study. C.H.B. reports grants from
Genome Canada and Genome British Columbia, during the conduct of the study;
personal fees and other from MRM proteomics, nonfinancial support from Creative
Molecules, personal fees from Molecular You, outside the submitted work. C.H.B.
is the chief strategy officer of MRM Proteomics, Inc. Y.M. reports grants from
Genome Canada; Genome British Columbia, during the conduct of the study.

