
1. Mol Ecol. 2020 Apr;29(7):1386-1397. doi: 10.1111/mec.15410. Epub 2020 Apr 6.

Combining genome-wide association study and FST -based approaches to identify
targets of Borrelia-mediated selection in natural rodent hosts.

Cornetti L(1)(2), Tschirren B(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Evolutionary Biology and Environmental Studies, University of
Zurich, Zurich, Switzerland.
(2)Zoological Institute, University of Basel, Basel, Switzerland.
(3)Centre for Ecology and Conservation, University of Exeter, Penryn, UK.

Recent advances in high-throughput sequencing technologies provide opportunities 
to gain novel insights into the genetic basis of phenotypic trait variation. Yet 
to date, progress in our understanding of genotype-phenotype associations in
nonmodel organisms in general and natural vertebrate populations in particular
has been hampered by small sample sizes typically available for wildlife
populations and a resulting lack of statistical power, as well as a limited
ability to control for false-positive signals. Here we propose to combine a
genome-wide association study (GWAS) and FST -based approach with
population-level replication to partly overcome these limitations. We present a
case study in which we used this approach in combination with
genotyping-by-sequencing (GBS) single nucleotide polymorphism (SNP) data to
identify genomic regions associated with Borrelia afzelii resistance or
susceptibility in the natural rodent host of this Lyme disease-causing
spirochete, the bank vole (Myodes glareolus). Using this combined approach we
identified four consensus SNPs located in exonic regions of the genes Slc26a4,
Tns3, Wscd1 and Espnl, which were significantly associated with the voles'
Borrelia infectious status within and across populations. Functional links
between host responses to bacterial infections and most of these genes have
previously been demonstrated in other rodent systems, making them promising new
candidates for the study of evolutionary host responses to Borrelia emergence.
Our approach is applicable to other systems and may facilitate the identification
of genetic variants underlying disease resistance or susceptibility, as well as
other ecologically relevant traits, in wildlife populations.

© 2020 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/mec.15410 
PMID: 32163646  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

