
1. J Sci Food Agric. 2020 Aug;100(10):3789-3802. doi: 10.1002/jsfa.10378. Epub 2020 
Apr 3.

Current and future experimental approaches in the study of grape and wine
polyphenols interacting gut microbiota.

Zorraquín I(1), Sánchez-Hernández E(2), Ayuda-Durán B(2), Silva M(1),
González-Paramás AM(2), Santos-Buelga C(2), Moreno-Arribas MV(1), Bartolomé B(1).

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Food Science Research (CIAL), Madrid, Spain.
(2)Grupo de Investigación en Polifenoles, Universidad de Salamanca, Salamanca,
Spain.

Interactions between polyphenols and gut microbiota are indeed a major issue of
current interest in food science research. Knowledge in this subject is
progressing as the experimental procedures and analysis techniques do. The aim of
this article is to critically review the more leading-edge approaches that have
been applied so far in the study of the interactions between grape/wine
polyphenols and gut microbiota. This is the case of in vitro dynamic
gastrointestinal simulation models that try to mitigate the limitations of simple
static models (batch culture fermentations). More complex approaches include the 
experimentation with animals (mice, rats, pigs, lambs and chicks) and nutritional
intervention studies in humans. Main advantages and limitations as well as the
most relevant findings achieved by each approach in the study of how grape/wine
polyphenols can modulate the composition and/or functionality of gut microbiota, 
are detailed. Also, common findings obtained by the three approaches (in vitro,
animal models and human nutritional interventions) such as the fact that the
Firmicutes/Bacteroidetes ratio tends to decrease after the
feed/intake/consumption of grape/wine polyphenols are highlighted. Additionally, 
a nematode (Caenorhabditis elegans) model, previously used for investigating the 
mechanisms of processes such as aging, neurodegeneration, oxidative stress and
inflammation, is presented as an emerging approach for the study of polyphenols
interacting gut microbiota. © 2020 Society of Chemical Industry.

© 2020 Society of Chemical Industry.

DOI: 10.1002/jsfa.10378 
PMID: 32167171  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

