
1. Front Microbiol. 2020 Feb 28;11:130. doi: 10.3389/fmicb.2020.00130. eCollection
2020.

Resistance Profiles of Salmonella Isolates Exposed to Stresses and the Expression
of Small Non-coding RNAs.

Wang H(1), Huang M(1), Zeng X(1), Peng B(1)(2), Xu X(1), Zhou G(1).

Author information: 
(1)Jiangsu Collaborative Innovation Center of Meat Production and Processing,
Quality and Safety Control, Nanjing Agricultural University, Nanjing, China.
(2)College of Animal Medicine, Xinjiang Agricultural University, Ürümqi, China.

Salmonella can resist various stresses and survive during food processing,
storage, and distribution, resulting in potential health risks to consumers.
Therefore, evaluation of bacterial survival profiles under various environmental 
stresses is necessary. In this study, the resistance profiles of five Salmonella 
isolates [serotypes with Agona, Infantis, Typhimurium, Enteritidis, and a
standard strain (ATCC 13076, Enteritidis serotype)] to acidic, hyperosmotic, and 
oxidative stresses were examined, and the relative expressions of non-coding
small RNAs were also evaluated, including CyaR, MicC, MicA, InvR, RybB, and DsrA,
induced by specific stresses. The results indicated that although all tested
strains displayed a certain resistance to stresses, there was great diversity in 
stress resistance among the strains. According to the reduction numbers of cells 
exposed to stress for 3 h, S. Enteritidis showed the highest resistance to acidic
and hyperosmotic stresses, whereas ATCC 13076 showed the greatest resistance to
oxidative stress, with less than 0.1 Log CFU/ml of cell reduction. Greater
resistance of cells to acidic, hyperosmotic, and oxidative stresses was observed 
within 1 h, after 2 h, and from 1 to 2 h, respectively. The relative expression
of sRNAs depended on the isolate for each stress; acidic exposure for the tested 
isolates induced high expression levels of DsrA, MicC, InvR, RybB, MicA, and
CyaR. The sRNA RybB, associated with sigma E and outer membrane protein in
bacteria, showed a fold change of greater than 7 in S. Enteritidis exposed to the
tested stresses. CyaR and InvR involved in general stress responses and stress
adaptation were also induced to show high expression levels of Salmonella exposed
to hyperosmotic stress. Overall, these findings demonstrated that the behaviors
of Salmonella under specific stresses varied according to strain and were likely 
not related to other profiles. The finding also provided insights into the
survival of Salmonella subjected to short-term stresses and for controlling
Salmonella in the food industry.

Copyright © 2020 Wang, Huang, Zeng, Peng, Xu and Zhou.

DOI: 10.3389/fmicb.2020.00130 
PMCID: PMC7059537
PMID: 32180763 

