
1. Front Immunol. 2020 Feb 28;11:392. doi: 10.3389/fimmu.2020.00392. eCollection
2020.

Identification and Characterization of Adipose Tissue-Derived Human Antibodies
With "Anti-self" Specificity.

Frasca D(1)(2)(3), Diaz A(1), Romero M(1), Garcia D(1), Jayram D(1), Thaller
S(4), Del Carmen Piqueras M(3), Bhattacharya S(3), Blomberg BB(1)(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, University of Miami Miller School
of Medicine, Miami, FL, United States.
(2)Sylvester Comprehensive Cancer Center, University of Miami Miller School of
Medicine, Miami, FL, United States.
(3)Miami Integrative Metabolomics Research Center (MIMRC), University of Miami
Miller School of Medicine, Miami, FL, United States.
(4)Division of Plastic and Reconstructive Surgery, Department of Surgery,
University of Miami Miller School of Medicine, Miami, FL, United States.

We have previously shown that the human obese adipose tissue (AT) contributes to 
increased secretion of adipocyte-specific IgG antibodies in individuals with
obesity. This occurs without any exogenous stimulation, because the ongoing
process of cell death in the obese AT leads to the release of "self" antigens
able to induce chronic stimulation of B cells. We have identified several
mechanisms responsible for the release of "self" antigens, such as hypoxia, cell 
cytotoxicity, and DNA damage. In this paper, we confirm and extend our initial
observation on a different cohort of individuals, and we show that also the
plasma of these individuals is enriched in IgG antibodies with specificities for 
adipocyte-derived antigens. Adipocyte-specific IgG secreted in the obese AT are
significantly correlated with those present in plasma. Using immunoprecipitation 
and mass spectrometry, we have identified these antigenic specificities. The
antigens are almost exclusively intracellular or cell-associated, usually not
recognized as "self" antigens, but they are released by cells dying in the AT. We
also show for the first time that the adipocytes in the obese AT contribute to
the secretion of IgG autoimmune antibodies and this seems to be due to their
expression of the antigen-presenting molecules CD1d and, to a much lesser extent,
MHC class II, as our mechanistic experiments performed in mice have shown. These 
results may lead to the development of novel therapeutic strategies to control
autoimmunity.

Copyright © 2020 Frasca, Diaz, Romero, Garcia, Jayram, Thaller, del Carmen
Piqueras, Bhattacharya and Blomberg.

DOI: 10.3389/fimmu.2020.00392 
PMCID: PMC7058997
PMID: 32184790  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

