
1. Front Immunol. 2020 Feb 28;11:296. doi: 10.3389/fimmu.2020.00296. eCollection
2020.

GPU-Accelerated Discovery of Pathogen-Derived Molecular Mimics of a T-Cell
Insulin Epitope.

Whalley T(1)(2), Dolton G(1), Brown PE(3), Wall A(1), Wooldridge L(4), van den
Berg H(5), Fuller A(1), Hopkins JR(1), Crowther MD(1), Attaf M(1), Knight RR(6), 
Cole DK(1), Peakman M(6), Sewell AK(1)(2), Szomolay B(1)(2).

Author information: 
(1)Cardiff University School of Medicine, Cardiff, United Kingdom.
(2)Systems Immunity Research Institute, Cardiff University, Cardiff, United
Kingdom.
(3)Zeeman Institute for Systems Biology and Infectious Disease Epidemiology
Research, University of Warwick Coventry, Coventry, United Kingdom.
(4)Faculty of Health Sciences, University of Bristol, Bristol, United Kingdom.
(5)Mathematics Institute, University of Warwick, Coventry, United Kingdom.
(6)Peter Gorer Department of Immunobiology, Guy's Hospital, London, United
Kingdom.

The strong links between (Human Leukocyte Antigen) HLA, infection and
autoimmunity combine to implicate T-cells as primary triggers of autoimmune
disease (AD). T-cell crossreactivity between microbially-derived peptides and
self-peptides has been shown to break tolerance and trigger AD in experimental
animal models. Detailed examination of the potential for T-cell crossreactivity
to trigger human AD will require means of predicting which peptides might be
recognised by autoimmune T-cell receptors (TCRs). Recent developments in high
throughput sequencing and bioinformatics mean that it is now possible to link
individual TCRs to specific pathologies for the first time. Deconvolution of TCR 
function requires knowledge of TCR specificity. Positional Scanning Combinatorial
Peptide Libraries (PS-CPLs) can be used to predict HLA-restriction and define
antigenic peptides derived from self and pathogen proteins. In silico search of
the known terrestrial proteome with a prediction algorithm that ranks potential
antigens in order of recognition likelihood requires complex, large-scale
computations over several days that are infeasible on a personal computer. We
decreased the time required for peptide searching to under 30 min using multiple 
blocks on graphics processing units (GPUs). This time-efficient, cost-effective
hardware accelerator was used to screen bacterial and fungal human pathogens for 
peptide sequences predicted to activate a T-cell clone, InsB4, that was isolated 
from a patient with type 1 diabetes and recognised the insulin B-derived epitope 
HLVEALYLV in the context of disease-risk allele HLA A*0201. InsB4 was shown to
kill HLA A*0201+ human insulin producing β-cells demonstrating that T-cells with 
this specificity might contribute to disease. The GPU-accelerated algorithm and
multispecies pathogen proteomic databases were validated to discover
pathogen-derived peptide sequences that acted as super-agonists for the InsB4
T-cell clone. Peptide-MHC tetramer binding and surface plasmon resonance were
used to confirm that the InsB4 TCR bound to the highest-ranked peptide agonists
derived from infectious bacteria and fungi. Adoption of GPU-accelerated
prediction of T-cell agonists has the capacity to revolutionise our understanding
of AD by identifying potential targets for autoimmune T-cells. This approach has 
further potential for dissecting T-cell responses to infectious disease and
cancer.

Copyright © 2020 Whalley, Dolton, Brown, Wall, Wooldridge, van den Berg, Fuller, 
Hopkins, Crowther, Attaf, Knight, Cole, Peakman, Sewell and Szomolay.

DOI: 10.3389/fimmu.2020.00296 
PMCID: PMC7058665
PMID: 32184781  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

