
1. Am J Pathol. 2020 Jun;190(6):1298-1308. doi: 10.1016/j.ajpath.2020.02.004. Epub
2020 Mar 16.

Sympathetic Nerves Positively Regulate Eosinophil-Driven Allergic Conjunctivitis 
via α1-Adrenergic Receptor Signaling.

Liu J(1), Huang S(2), Li F(3), Wu M(1), He J(2), Xue Y(1), Fu T(1), Yu R(2), Chen
X(1), Wang Y(4), Li Z(5).

Author information: 
(1)International Ocular Surface Research Center, Institute of Ophthalmology and
Key Laboratory for Regenerative Medicine, Jinan University, Guangzhou, China.
(2)International Ocular Surface Research Center, Institute of Ophthalmology and
Key Laboratory for Regenerative Medicine, Jinan University, Guangzhou, China;
Department of Ophthalmology, The First Affiliated Hospital of Jinan University,
Guangzhou, China.
(3)International Ocular Surface Research Center, Institute of Ophthalmology and
Key Laboratory for Regenerative Medicine, Jinan University, Guangzhou, China;
Department of Microbiology and Immunology, School of Medicine, Jinan University, 
Guangzhou, China.
(4)Departments of Science and Technology Administration, Henan Provincial
People's Hospital, Henan University People's Hospital, Zhengzhou University
People's Hospital, Zhengzhou, China.
(5)International Ocular Surface Research Center, Institute of Ophthalmology and
Key Laboratory for Regenerative Medicine, Jinan University, Guangzhou, China;
Department of Ophthalmology, The First Affiliated Hospital of Jinan University,
Guangzhou, China; Department of Ophthalmology, Henan Provincial People's
Hospital, Henan University People's Hospital, Zhengzhou University People's
Hospital, Zhengzhou, China. Electronic address: tzhijieli@jnu.edu.cn.

Eosinophils are a major cause of tissue injury in allergic conjunctivitis. The
biological nature of eosinophils in the conjunctiva and the mechanisms that
control eosinophils' responses in allergic conjunctivitis are currently not
completely understood. This study reports that conjunctival eosinophils comprise 
two populations-Siglec-Fint and Siglec-Fhi-in different life stages. Siglec-Fint 
eosinophils partly expressed CD34 and were in the immature (or steady) state.
Siglec-Fhi eosinophils did not express CD34, sharply increased in number after
short ragweed (SRW) pollen challenge, and were in the mature (or activated)
state. Moreover, chemical sympathectomy by 6-hydroxydopamine reduced the
recruitment and activation of eosinophils, whereas the activation of the
sympathetic nerve system (SNS) with restraint stress accelerated the recruitment 
and activation of eosinophils in SRW-induced conjunctivitis. It was also found
that two eosinophil populations expressed alpha-1a-adrenergic receptors
(α1a-ARs); in SRW-induced conjunctivitis, treatment with an α1a-AR antagonist
decreased eosinophil responses, whereas treatment with an α1a-AR agonist
aggravated eosinophil responses. Thus, eosinophil responses in conjunctivitis are
regulated by the SNS via α1a-AR signaling. SNS inputs or α1a-AR function may be
potential targets for the treatment of allergic conjunctivitis.

Copyright © 2020 American Society for Investigative Pathology. Published by
Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ajpath.2020.02.004 
PMID: 32194050  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

