
1. Spectrochim Acta A Mol Biomol Spectrosc. 2020 Jun 15;234:118255. doi:
10.1016/j.saa.2020.118255. Epub 2020 Mar 12.

Study on early rice blast diagnosis based on unpre-processed Raman spectral data.

Zhao X(1), Liu Z(2), He Y(2), Zhang W(2), Tong L(3).

Author information: 
(1)College of Electrical and Information, Heilongjiang Bayi Agricultural
University, China. Electronic address: xy_zhao77@163.com.
(2)College of Electrical and Information, Heilongjiang Bayi Agricultural
University, China.
(3)Communication and Electronic engineering Institute, Qiqihar University, China.

Traditionally, the rice blast is diagnosed with the naked-eyes. There is an
urgent need to provide a method that can identify the early rice blast without
symptoms. In the paper, a method for the early rice blast diagnosis based on the 
Raman spectroscopy was proposed. Considering the compositions of the biological
sample are complex, characteristic peaks are severely crossed, the biological
fluorescence background and the noise are strong, and the Raman signal is weak.
Different data pre-processing methods will lead to different diagnostic
accuracies of Raman models, especially for biological samples. This paper
proposed a method for modeling a Raman model based on data without
pre-processing. In this method, the raw data are decomposed with Empirical Mode
Decomposition (EMD) into several Intrinsic Mode Functions (IMF). Then, based on
the self-correlation coefficient of the IMFs and the times of the IMFs crossing
the zero Raman Intensity line, IMFs are filtered to get the signal components.
Taking the characteristic peaks of the β-carotene, the chlorophyll, and the
chitin as the initial characteristic variables, the characteristic variables of
the signal components were screened based on Successive Projections Algorithm
(SPA). Finally, the obtained characteristic variables were used to establish a
Partial Least Squares (PLS) regression model for the rice blast classification,
and the test classification accuracy was 94.12%, which was higher than that of
models based on spectral data pre-processed by Moving Average Smoothing +
Baseline offset, Savitzky Golay Smoothing + Baseline offset, Gaussian Filter
Smoothing + Baseline offset and the dB5 wavelet, 3-layer decomposition, Stein
Unbiased Risk Estimate, the modulus maximum value method +7 points, 3rd-order
Polynomial Fitting.

Copyright © 2020 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.saa.2020.118255 
PMID: 32217450  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of competing interest The authors
declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal
relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this
paper.

