
1. Mar Drugs. 2020 Mar 31;18(4). pii: E187. doi: 10.3390/md18040187.

Screening Marine Natural Products for New Drug Leads against Trypanosomatids and 
Malaria.

Álvarez-Bardón M(1), Pérez-Pertejo Y(1), Ordóñez C(1), Sepúlveda-Crespo D(1),
Carballeira NM(2), Tekwani BL(3), Murugesan S(4), Martinez-Valladares M(5),
García-Estrada C(6), Reguera RM(1), Balaña-Fouce R(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biomedical Sciences, University of León, 24071 León, Spain.
(2)Department of Chemistry, University of Puerto Rico, Río Piedras 00925-2537,
San Juan, Puerto Rico.
(3)Department of Infectious Diseases, Division of Drug Discovery, Southern
Research, Birmingham, AL 35205, USA.
(4)Department of Pharmacy, Birla Institute of Technology and Science, Pilani
Campus, Vidya Vihar, Pilani 333031, India.
(5)Department of Animal Health, Instituto de Ganadería de Montaña
(CSIC-Universidad de León), 24346 Grulleros, León, Spain.
(6)INBIOTEC (Instituto de Biotecnología de León), Avda. Real 1-Parque Científico 
de León, 24006 León, Spain.

Neglected Tropical Diseases (NTD) represent a serious threat to humans,
especially for those living in poor or developing countries. Almost one-sixth of 
the world population is at risk of suffering from these diseases and many
thousands die because of NTDs, to which we should add the sanitary, labor and
social issues that hinder the economic development of these countries.
Protozoan-borne diseases are responsible for more than one million deaths every
year. Visceral leishmaniasis, Chagas disease or sleeping sickness are among the
most lethal NTDs. Despite not being considered an NTD by the World Health
Organization (WHO), malaria must be added to this sinister group. Malaria, caused
by the apicomplexan parasite Plasmodium falciparum, is responsible for thousands 
of deaths each year. The treatment of this disease has been losing effectiveness 
year after year. Many of the medicines currently in use are obsolete due to their
gradual loss of efficacy, their intrinsic toxicity and the emergence of drug
resistance or a lack of adherence to treatment. Therefore, there is an urgent and
global need for new drugs. Despite this, the scant interest shown by most of the 
stakeholders involved in the pharmaceutical industry makes our present
therapeutic arsenal scarce, and until recently, the search for new drugs has not 
been seriously addressed. The sources of new drugs for these and other
pathologies include natural products, synthetic molecules or repurposing drugs.
The most frequent sources of natural products are microorganisms, e.g., bacteria,
fungi, yeasts, algae and plants, which are able to synthesize many drugs that are
currently in use (e.g. antimicrobials, antitumor, immunosuppressants, etc.). The 
marine environment is another well-established source of bioactive natural
products, with recent applications against parasites, bacteria and other
pathogens which affect humans and animals. Drug discovery techniques have rapidly
advanced since the beginning of the millennium. The combination of novel
techniques that include the genetic modification of pathogens, bioimaging and
robotics has given rise to the standardization of High-Performance Screening
platforms in the discovery of drugs. These advancements have accelerated the
discovery of new chemical entities with antiparasitic effects. This review
presents critical updates regarding the use of High-Throughput Screening (HTS) in
the discovery of drugs for NTDs transmitted by protozoa, including malaria, and
its application in the discovery of new drugs of marine origin.

DOI: 10.3390/md18040187 
PMCID: PMC7230869
PMID: 32244488  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.

