
1. Animals (Basel). 2020 Apr 1;10(4). pii: E598. doi: 10.3390/ani10040598.

Experimental Evidence Reveals Both Cross-Infection and Cross-Contamination Risk
of Embryo Storage in Liquid Nitrogen Biobanks.

Marin C(1), Garcia-Dominguez X(2), Montoro-Dasi L(2), Lorenzo-Rebenaque L(1),
Vicente JS(2), Marco-Jimenez F(2).

Author information: 
(1)Instituto de Ciencias Biomédicas, Facultad de Veterinaria, Universidad
Cardenal Herrera-CEU, CEU Universities, Avenida Seminario s/n, 46113 Moncada,
Spain.
(2)Instituto de Ciencia y Tecnología Animal, Universitat Politècnica de València,
46022 Valencia, Spain.

In recent decades, gamete and embryo cryopreservation have become routine
procedures in livestock and human assisted reproduction. However, the safe
storage of germplasm and the prevention of disease transmission continue to be
potential hazards of disease transmission through embryo transfer. This study
aimed to demonstrate the potential risk of cross-infection of embryos from
contaminated liquid nitrogen, and cross-contamination of sterile liquid nitrogen 
from infected embryos in naked and closed devices. Additionally, we examined the 
effects of antibiotic-free media on culture development of infected embryos. The 
study was a laboratory-based analysis using rabbit as a model. Two experiments
were performed to evaluate both cross-infection (liquid nitrogen to embryos) and 
cross-contamination (embryos to liquid nitrogen) of artificially inoculated
Salmonella Typhimurium, Staphylococcus aureus, Enterobacter aerogenes, and
Aspergillus brasiliensis. Rapid cooling through vitrification was conducted on
rabbit embryos, stored for a year, thawed, and cultured. In vivo produced late
morulae-early blastocyst stages (72 h) embryos were used (n = 480). Embryos were 
cultured for 1 h in solutions with and without pathogens. Then, the embryos were 
vitrified and stored in naked and closed devices for one year in two liquid
nitrogen biobanks (one pathogen-free and the other artificially contaminated).
Embryos were warmed and cultured for a further 48 h, assessing the development
and the presence of microorganism (chromogenic media, scanning electron
microscopy). Embryos stored in naked devices in artificially contaminated liquid 
nitrogen became infected (12.5%), while none of the embryos stored in closed
devices were infected. Meanwhile, storage of artificially infected embryos
incurred liquid nitrogen biobank contamination (100%). Observations by scanning
electron microscopy revealed that all the microorganisms were caught in the
surface of embryos after the vitrification-thawed procedure. Nevertheless,
embryos cultured in antibiotics and antimycotic medium developed to the hatched
blastocyst stage, while artificially infected embryos cultured in antibiotic-free
medium failed to develop. In conclusion, our findings support that both
cross-contamination and cross-infection during embryo storage in liquid nitrogen 
biobanks are plausible. So, to ensure biosafety for the cryogenic storage, closed
systems that avoid direct contact with liquid nitrogen must be used. Moreover, it
seems essential to provide best practice guidelines for the cryogenic
preservation and storage of gametes and embryos, to define appropriate quality
and risk management procedures.

DOI: 10.3390/ani10040598 
PMCID: PMC7222773
PMID: 32244732 

Conflict of interest statement: Abbreviations: The following abbreviations are
used in this manuscript:

