
1. Asian Spine J. 2020 Apr 8. doi: 10.31616/asj.2019.0285. [Epub ahead of print]

The Anti-Inflammatory and Cytoprotective Efficiency of Curvularin, a Fungal
Macrolactone against Lipopolysaccharide-Induced Inflammatory Response in Nucleus 
Pulposus Cells: An In Vitro Study.

Banala RR(1), Vemuri SK(1), Ev S(2), Av GR(1), Gpv S(1)(3).

Author information: 
(1)Sunshine Medical Academy of Research and Training, Sunshine Hospitals,
Secunderabad, India.
(2)Department of Microbiology, St. Francis College for Women, Hyderabad, India.
(3)Department of Spine Surgery, Star Hospitals, Hyderabad,India.

Study Design: Developing an in vitro model for assessing the anti-inflammatory
properties of curvularin.
Purpose: To evaluate the efficacy of natural fungal macrolactone as a therapeutic
drug against lipopolysaccharide (LPS)-induced inflammation in primary human
nucleus pulposus cells (NPCs) in vitro.
Overview of Literature: Lumbar disk disease is a common cause of lower back pain 
(LBP) and sciatica. It is an established fact that inflammation, rather than
mechanical compression on the nerve root, plays a role in the cause of LBP and
sciatica. Current treatment options for reducing inflammation are either
nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs or steroids, prolonged use of which can
potentially lead to adverse effects such as gastrointestinal disturbances and
renal and cardiac issues. Hence, there is a need for better antiinflammatory
drugs with no or minimal complications for treating inflammation-induced LBP and 
sciatica. Curvularin (Cur), a fungal macrolactone, is known for its
anti-inflammatory activity, but nothing is known about its impact on inflammation
due to disk pathologies.
Methods: Primary NPCs were cultured and characterized by flow cytometry and
immunocytochemistry using the CD24 antibody and treated with 10 μg/mL LPS for 36 
hours and then treated with Cur, betamethasone, and dexamethasone (10 μg/mL) for 
48 hours, after which cell cycle analysis, cell viability assay, and gene
expression studies (quantitative polymerase chain reaction [PCR] and quantitative
real-time-PCR) were conducted. The NPCs treated with Cur downregulated the
expression of pro-inflammatory cytokines (tumor necrosis factor-α, interleukin
[IL]-1β, and IL-6); matrix metalloproteinases (MMPs; MMP-2 and MMP-3), ADAMTS;
and apoptotic marker (cytochrome c).
Results: In our study, Cur-treated cells showed enhanced expression of collagen
9A1 and insulin-like growth factor receptor 1, indicating the recovery of NPCs
from inflammatory assault.
Conclusions: Based on observations, the anti-inflammatory properties of Cur
render it an excellent drug molecule for treating disk degeneration
nonsurgically, by direct injection into spinal disks when treating LBP and
sciatica.

DOI: 10.31616/asj.2019.0285 
PMID: 32252191 

