
1. Clin Infect Dis. 2021 Feb 1;72(3):414-420. doi: 10.1093/cid/ciaa049.

Multispecies Outbreak of Verona Integron-Encoded Metallo-ß-Lactamase-Producing
Multidrug-Resistant Bacteria Driven by a Promiscuous Incompatibility Group A/C2
Plasmid.

de Man TJB(1), Yaffee AQ(2)(3), Zhu W(1), Batra D(4), Alyanak E(4), Rowe LA(1),
McAllister G(1), Moulton-Meissner H(1), Boyd S(1), Flinchum A(3), Slayton RB(1), 
Hancock S(5)(6), Spalding Walters M(1), Laufer Halpin A(1), Rasheed JK(1),
Noble-Wang J(1), Kallen AJ(1), Limbago BM(1).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Healthcare Quality Promotion, Centers for Disease Control and
Prevention, Atlanta, Georgia, USA.
(2)Epidemic Intelligence Service, Division of Scientific Education and
Professional Development, Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, Atlanta,
Georgia, USA.
(3)Kentucky Department for Public Health, Frankfort, Kentucky, USA.
(4)Division of Scientific Resources, Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, 
Atlanta, Georgia, USA.
(5)School of Chemistry and Molecular Biosciences, The University of Queensland,
Brisbane, Australia.
(6)Australian Infectious Diseases Research Centre, University of Queensland,
Brisbane, Australia.

BACKGROUND: Antibiotic resistance is often spread through bacterial populations
via conjugative plasmids. However, plasmid transfer is not well recognized in
clinical settings because of technical limitations, and health care-associated
infections are usually caused by clonal transmission of a single pathogen. In
2015, multiple species of carbapenem-resistant Enterobacteriaceae (CRE), all
producing a rare carbapenemase, were identified among patients in an intensive
care unit. This observation suggested a large, previously unrecognized plasmid
transmission chain and prompted our investigation.
METHODS: Electronic medical record reviews, infection control observations, and
environmental sampling completed the epidemiologic outbreak investigation. A
laboratory analysis, conducted on patient and environmental isolates, included
long-read whole-genome sequencing to fully elucidate plasmid DNA structures.
Bioinformatics analyses were applied to infer plasmid transmission chains and
results were subsequently confirmed using plasmid conjugation experiments.
RESULTS: We identified 14 Verona integron-encoded metallo-ß-lactamase
(VIM)-producing CRE in 12 patients, and 1 additional isolate was obtained from a 
patient room sink drain. Whole-genome sequencing identified the horizontal
transfer of blaVIM-1, a rare carbapenem resistance mechanism in the United
States, via a promiscuous incompatibility group A/C2 plasmid that spread among 5 
bacterial species isolated from patients and the environment.
CONCLUSIONS: This investigation represents the largest known outbreak of
VIM-producing CRE in the United States to date, which comprises numerous
bacterial species and strains. We present evidence of in-hospital plasmid
transmission, as well as environmental contamination. Our findings demonstrate
the potential for 2 types of hospital-acquired infection outbreaks: those due to 
clonal expansion and those due to the spread of conjugative plasmids encoding
antibiotic resistance across species.

© Published by Oxford University Press for the Infectious Diseases Society of
America 2020.

DOI: 10.1093/cid/ciaa049 
PMID: 32255490 

