
1. Clin Transl Immunology. 2020 Apr 8;9(4):e1124. doi: 10.1002/cti2.1124.
eCollection 2020 Apr.

Immunosenescent characteristics of T cells in young patients following
haploidentical haematopoietic stem cell transplantation from parental donors.

Lee GH(1)(2), Hong KT(3)(4), Choi JY(3)(4), Shin HY(3)(4), Lee
WW(1)(2)(4)(5)(6)(7)(8), Kang HJ(3)(4).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biomedical Sciences Seoul National University College of
Medicine Seoul South Korea.
(2)BK21Plus Biomedical Science Project Seoul National University College of
Medicine Seoul South Korea.
(3)Department of Pediatrics Seoul National University College of Medicine Seoul
South Korea.
(4)Seoul National University Cancer Research Institute Seoul South Korea.
(5)Department of Microbiology and Immunology Seoul National University College of
Medicine Seoul South Korea.
(6)Ischemic/Hypoxic Disease Institute Seoul National University College of
Medicine Seoul South Korea.
(7)Institute of Infectious Diseases Seoul National University College of Medicine
Seoul South Korea.
(8)Seoul National University Hospital Biomedical Research Institute Seoul South
Korea.

Objectives: Paediatric and adolescent patients in need of allogeneic
haematopoietic stem cell transplantation (HSCT) generally receive stem cells from
older, unrelated or parental donors when a sibling donor is not available.
Despite encouraging clinical outcomes, it has been suggested that immune
reconstitution accompanied by increased replicative stress and a large difference
between donor and recipient age may worsen immunosenescence in paediatric
recipients.
Methods: In this study, paired samples were collected at the same time from
donors and recipients of haploidentical haematopoietic stem cell transplantation 
(HaploSCT). We then conducted flow cytometry-based phenotypic and functional
analyses and telomere length (TL) measurements of 21 paired T-cell sets from
parental donors and children who received T-cell-replete HaploSCT with
post-transplant cyclophosphamide (PTCy).
Results: Senescent T cells, CD28- or CD57+ cells, were significantly expanded in 
patients. Further, not only CD4+CD28- T cells, but also CD4+CD28+ T cells showed 
reduced cytokine production capacity and impaired polyfunctionality compared with
parental donors, whereas their TCR-mediated proliferation capacity was
comparable. Of note, the TL in patient T cells was preserved, or even slightly
longer, in senescent T cells compared with donor cells. Regression analysis
showed that senescent features of CD4+ and CD8+ T cells in patients were
influenced by donor age and the frequency of CD28- cells, respectively.
Conclusion: Our data suggest that in paediatric HaploSCT, premature
immunosenescent changes occur in T cells from parental donors, and therefore,
long-term immune monitoring should be conducted.

© 2020 The Authors. Clinical & Translational Immunology published by John Wiley &
Sons Australia, Ltd on behalf of Australian and New Zealand Society for
Immunology Inc.

DOI: 10.1002/cti2.1124 
PMCID: PMC7142179
PMID: 32280463 

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that they have no conflicts
of interest with the contents of this article.

