
1. Photodiagnosis Photodyn Ther. 2020 Jun;30:101780. doi:
10.1016/j.pdpdt.2020.101780. Epub 2020 Apr 18.

Sonodynamic excitation of nanomicelle curcumin for eradication of Streptococcus
mutans under sonodynamic antimicrobial chemotherapy: Enhanced anti-caries
activity of nanomicelle curcumin.

Pourhajibagher M(1), Rahimi Esboei B(2), Hodjat M(1), Bahador A(3).

Author information: 
(1)Dental Research Center, Dentistry Research Institute, Tehran University of
Medical Sciences, Tehran, Iran.
(2)Department of Parasitology and Mycology, Faculty of Medicine, Tonekabone
Branch, Islamic Azad University, Tonekabone, Iran; Toxoplasmosis Research Center,
Mazandaran University of Medical Sciences, Sari, Iran.
(3)Oral Microbiology Laboratory, Department of Medical Microbiology, School of
Medicine, Tehran University of Medical Sciences, Tehran, Iran. Electronic
address: abahador@sina.tums.ac.ir.

BACKGROUND: Inactivation of microorganisms related to dental caries has been
considered the therapy of choice in the treatment of caries. The proposed study
aims to assess the effect of sonodynamic excitation of nanomicelle curcumin
(NM@Cur) compared to Cur for eradication of Streptococcus mutans under
sonodynamic antimicrobial chemotherapy (SACT).
MATERIALS AND METHODS: The NM@Cur as a sonosensitizer was synthesized and its
morphology, particle size distribution, zeta potential, and physical stability
were then determined. After evaluating the Cur and NM@Cur uptake in S. mutans
strain, Cur- and NM@Cur-SACT effects were determined on colony forming unit
(CFU/mL) and reactive oxygen species (ROS) levels. Additionally, cytotoxicity and
apoptotic effects of Cur- and NM@Cur-SACT on human gingival fibroblast (HGF)
cells were assessed using MTT assay and flow cytometry analysis, respectively.
RESULTS: Transmission electron microscope, particle size distribution, and zeta
potential analysis confirmed successful synthesis of NM@Cur. The finding of this 
study showed that an incubation time of 5 min to 1 h was sufficient to achieve
maximal uptake of Cur and NM@Cur in S. mutans. SACT with Cur at a concentration
of 50 mM and ultrasound intensity at 1.56 W/cm2 for 1 min significantly reduced
the count of S. mutans to 90.8 %, compared to control group (P < 0.05), while the
count of S. mutans decreased to 99.9 % following treatment with the NM@Cur-SACT
(P < 0.05), that was also confirmed via fluorescence microscopy. As well as, SACT
with 50 mM NM@Cur not only had the least toxicity against HGF cells, but also
showed 10.8-fold increase in intracellular ROS production.
CONCLUSIONS: Overall, this study revealed that NM@Cur-mediated SACT with the
least cytotoxicity and apoptotic effects and the highest cellular uptake, ROS
production, and antimicrobial activites could effectively inhibit the growth of
the S. mutans in compare with Cur.

Copyright © 2020 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.pdpdt.2020.101780 
PMID: 32315777 

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of Competing Interest The authors
declare that there are no conflicts of interest regarding the publication of this
paper.

