
1. J Allergy Clin Immunol. 2020 Nov;146(5):1180-1193. doi:
10.1016/j.jaci.2020.03.034. Epub 2020 Apr 20.

Defective Sec61α1 underlies a novel cause of autosomal dominant severe congenital
neutropenia.

Van Nieuwenhove E(1), Barber JS(2), Neumann J(2), Smeets E(3), Willemsen M(2),
Pasciuto E(2), Prezzemolo T(2), Lagou V(2), Seldeslachts L(4), Malengier-Devlies 
B(5), Metzemaekers M(6), Haßdenteufel S(7), Kerstens A(8), van der Kant R(9),
Rousseau F(9), Schymkowitz J(9), Di Marino D(10), Lang S(7), Zimmermann R(7),
Schlenner S(4), Munck S(8), Proost P(6), Matthys P(5), Devalck C(11), Boeckx
N(12), Claessens F(3), Wouters C(13), Humblet-Baron S(2), Meyts I(14), Liston
A(15).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, Laboratory of Adaptive Immunity, KU
Leuven, Leuven, Belgium; VIB-KU Leuven Center for Brain and Disease Research,
Leuven, Belgium; Department of Pediatrics, University Hospitals Leuven, Leuven,
Belgium.
(2)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, Laboratory of Adaptive Immunity, KU
Leuven, Leuven, Belgium; VIB-KU Leuven Center for Brain and Disease Research,
Leuven, Belgium.
(3)Department of Cellular and Molecular Medicine, Laboratory of Molecular
Endocrinology, KU Leuven, Leuven, Belgium.
(4)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, Laboratory of Adaptive Immunity, KU
Leuven, Leuven, Belgium.
(5)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, Laboratory of Immunobiology, Rega
Institute for Medical Research, KU Leuven, Leuven, Belgium.
(6)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, Laboratory of Molecular Immunology,
Rega Institute for Medical Research, KU Leuven, Leuven, Belgium.
(7)Department of Medical Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Saarland University,
Homburg, Germany.
(8)VIB-KU Leuven Center for Brain and Disease Research, Leuven, Belgium; VIB Bio 
Imaging Core & Department for Neuroscience, KU Leuven, Leuven, Belgium.
(9)VIB-KU Leuven Center for Brain and Disease Research, Leuven, Belgium;
Department of Cellular and Molecular Medicine, Switch Laboratory, KU Leuven,
Leuven, Belgium.
(10)Department of Life and Environmental Sciences, New York-Marche Structural
Biology Center, Polytechnic University of Marche, Ancona, Italy.
(11)Department of Hemato-Oncology, Hôpital Universitaire Des Enfants Reine
Fabiola, Université Libre de Bruxelles, Brussels, Belgium.
(12)Department of Oncology, KU Leuven, Leuven, Belgium; Department of Laboratory 
Medicine, University Hospitals Leuven, Leuven, Belgium.
(13)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, Immunobiology, KU Leuven, Leuven, 
Belgium; Department of Pediatrics, Division of Pediatric Rheumatology, University
Hospitals Leuven, Leuven, Belgium; ERN-RITA Executive Board, Leuven, Belgium.
(14)Department of Microbiology, Immunology and Transplantation, Laboratory for
Inborn Errors of Immunity, KU Leuven, Leuven, Belgium; Department of Pediatrics, 
Division of Primary Immunodeficiencies, University Hospitals Leuven, Leuven,
Belgium; ERN-RITA Core Center, Leuven, Belgium. Electronic address:
isabelle.meyts@uzleuven.be.
(15)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, Laboratory of Adaptive Immunity,
KU Leuven, Leuven, Belgium; VIB-KU Leuven Center for Brain and Disease Research, 
Leuven, Belgium; Laboratory of Lymphocyte Signalling and Development, The
Babraham Institute, Babraham Research Campus, Cambridge, United Kingdom.
Electronic address: adrian.liston@babraham.ac.uk.

BACKGROUND: The molecular cause of severe congenital neutropenia (SCN) is unknown
in 30% to 50% of patients. SEC61A1 encodes the α-subunit of the Sec61 complex,
which governs endoplasmic reticulum protein transport and passive calcium
leakage. Recently, mutations in SEC61A1 were reported to be pathogenic in common 
variable immunodeficiency and glomerulocystic kidney disease.
OBJECTIVE: Our aim was to expand the spectrum of SEC61A1-mediated disease to
include autosomal dominant SCN.
METHODS: Whole exome sequencing findings were validated, and reported mutations
were compared by Western blotting, Ca2+ flux assays, differentiation of
transduced HL-60 cells, in vitro differentiation of primary CD34 cells,
quantitative PCR for unfolded protein response (UPR) genes, and single-cell RNA
sequencing on whole bone marrow.
RESULTS: We identified a novel de novo missense mutation in SEC61A1
(c.A275G;p.Q92R) in a patient with SCN who was born to nonconsanguineous Belgian 
parents. The mutation results in diminished protein expression, disturbed protein
translocation, and an increase in calcium leakage from the endoplasmic reticulum.
In vitro differentiation of CD34+ cells recapitulated the patient's clinical
arrest in granulopoiesis. The impact of Q92R-Sec61α1 on neutrophil maturation was
validated by using HL-60 cells, in which transduction reduced differentiation
into CD11b+CD16+ cells. A potential mechanism for this defect is the uncontrolled
initiation of the unfolded protein stress response, with single-cell analysis of 
primary bone marrow revealing perturbed UPR in myeloid precursors and in vitro
differentiation of primary CD34+ cells revealing upregulation of
CCAAT/enhancer-binding protein homologous protein and immunoglobulin heavy chain 
binding protein UPR-response genes.
CONCLUSION: Specific mutations in SEC61A1 cause SCN through dysregulation of the 
UPR.

Copyright © 2020 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jaci.2020.03.034 
PMCID: PMC7649975
PMID: 32325141  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

