
1. PLoS One. 2020 Apr 24;15(4):e0225560. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0225560.
eCollection 2020.

Oral feeding with probiotic Lactobacillus rhamnosus attenuates cigarette
smoke-induced COPD in C57Bl/6 mice: Relevance to inflammatory markers in human
bronchial epithelial cells.

Carvalho JL(1), Miranda M(1), Fialho AK(1), Castro-Faria-Neto H(2), Anatriello
E(1), Keller AC(3), Aimbire F(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Science and Technology, Federal University of São Paulo, São
José dos Campos, São Paulo, Brazil.
(2)Laboratory of Immunopharmacology, FioCruz, Rio de Janeiro, Brazil.
(3)Department of Microbiology, Immunology and Parasitology, Federal University of
São Paulo, São Paulo, São Paulo, Brazil.

COPD is a prevalent lung disease with significant impacts on public health.
Affected airways exhibit pulmonary neutrophilia and consequent secretion of
pro-inflammatory cytokines and proteases, which result in lung emphysema.
Probiotics act as nonspecific modulators of the innate immune system that improve
several inflammatory responses. To investigate the effect of Lactobacillus
rhamnosus (Lr) on cigarette smoke (CS)-induced COPD C57Bl/6 mice were treated
with Lr during the week before COPD induction and three times/week until
euthanasia. For in vitro assays, murine bronchial epithelial cells as well as
human bronchial epithelial cells exposed to cigarette smoke extract during 24
hours were treated with Lr 1 hour before CSE addition. Lr treatment attenuated
the inflammatory response both in the airways and lung parenchyma, reducing
inflammatory cells infiltration and the production of pro-inflammatory cytokines 
and chemokines. Also, Lr-treated mice presented with lower metalloproteases in
lung tissue and lung remodeling. In parallel to the reduction in the expression
of TLR2, TLR4, TLR9, STAT3, and NF-κB in lung tissue, Lr increased the levels of 
IL-10 as well as SOCS3 and TIMP1/2, indicating the induction of an
anti-inflammatory environment. Similarly, murine bronchial epithelial cells as
well as human bronchial epithelial cells (BEAS) exposed to CSE produced
pro-inflammatory cytokines and chemokines, which were inhibited by Lr treatment
in association with the production of anti-inflammatory molecules. Moreover, the 
presence of Lr also modulated the expression of COPD-associated transcription
found into BALF of COPD mice group, i.e., Lr downregulated expression of NF-κB
and STAT3, and inversely upregulated increased expression of SOCS3. Thus, our
findings indicate that Lr modulates the balance between pro- and
anti-inflammatory cytokines in human bronchial epithelial cells upon CS exposure 
and it can be a useful tool to improve the lung inflammatory response associated 
with COPD.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0225560 
PMCID: PMC7182195
PMID: 32330145  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have declared that no competing
interest exist.

