
1. mBio. 2020 Apr 28;11(2). pii: e00277-20. doi: 10.1128/mBio.00277-20.

Complete Structure of the Enterococcal Polysaccharide Antigen (EPA) of
Vancomycin-Resistant Enterococcus faecalis V583 Reveals that EPA Decorations Are 
Teichoic Acids Covalently Linked to a Rhamnopolysaccharide Backbone.

Guerardel Y(1), Sadovskaya I(2), Maes E(3), Furlan S(4), Chapot-Chartier MP(4),
Mesnage S(5), Rigottier-Gois L(4), Serror P(6).

Author information: 
(1)Univ. Lille, CNRS, UMR 8576-UGSF-Unité de Glycobiologie Structurale et
Fonctionnelle, Lille, France Yann.Guerardel@univ-lille.fr
pascale.serror@inrae.fr.
(2)Univ. Littoral Côte d'Opale, UMR 1158 BioEcoAgro, TERRA Viollette, USC Anses, 
INRAe, Univ. Lille, Univ. Artois, Univ. Picardie Jules Verne, Univ. Liège,
Yncréa, Boulogne-sur-Mer, France.
(3)Univ. Lille, CNRS, UMR 8576-UGSF-Unité de Glycobiologie Structurale et
Fonctionnelle, Lille, France.
(4)Université Paris-Saclay, INRAE, AgroParisTech, Micalis Institute,
Jouy-en-Josas, France.
(5)University of Sheffield, Department of Molecular Biology and Biotechnology,
Sheffield, United Kingdom.
(6)Université Paris-Saclay, INRAE, AgroParisTech, Micalis Institute,
Jouy-en-Josas, France Yann.Guerardel@univ-lille.fr pascale.serror@inrae.fr.

All enterococci produce a complex polysaccharide called the enterococcal
polysaccharide antigen (EPA). This polymer is required for normal cell growth and
division and for resistance to cephalosporins and plays a critical role in
host-pathogen interaction. The EPA contributes to host colonization and is
essential for virulence, conferring resistance to phagocytosis during the
infection. Recent studies revealed that the "decorations" of the EPA polymer,
encoded by genetic loci that are variable between isolates, underpin the
biological activity of this surface polysaccharide. In this work, we investigated
the structure of the EPA polymer produced by the high-risk enterococcal clonal
complex Enterococcus faecalis V583. We analyzed purified EPA from the wild-type
strain and a mutant lacking decorations and elucidated the structure of the EPA
backbone and decorations. We showed that the rhamnan backbone of EPA is composed 
of a hexasaccharide repeat unit of C2- and C3-linked rhamnan chains, partially
substituted in the C3 position by α-glucose (α-Glc) and in the C2 position by
β-N-acetylglucosamine (β-GlcNAc). The so-called "EPA decorations" consist of
phosphopolysaccharide chains corresponding to teichoic acids covalently bound to 
the rhamnan backbone. The elucidation of the complete EPA structure allowed us to
propose a biosynthetic pathway, a first essential step toward the design of
antimicrobials targeting the synthesis of this virulence factor.IMPORTANCE
Enterococci are opportunistic pathogens responsible for hospital- and
community-acquired infections. All enterococci produce a surface polysaccharide
called EPA (enterococcal polysaccharide antigen) required for biofilm formation, 
antibiotic resistance, and pathogenesis. Despite the critical role of EPA in cell
growth and division and as a major virulence factor, no information is available 
on its structure. Here, we report the complete structure of the EPA polymer
produced by the model strain E. faecalis V583. We describe the structure of the
EPA backbone, made of a rhamnan hexasaccharide substituted by Glc and GlcNAc
residues, and show that teichoic acids are covalently bound to this rhamnan
chain, forming the so-called "EPA decorations" essential for host colonization
and pathogenesis. This report represents a key step in efforts to identify the
structural properties of EPA that are essential for its biological activity and
to identify novel targets to develop preventive and therapeutic approaches
against enterococci.

Copyright © 2020 Guerardel et al.

DOI: 10.1128/mBio.00277-20 
PMCID: PMC7188991
PMID: 32345640  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

