
1. Kurume Med J. 2020 Jul 1;66(1):15-27. doi: 10.2739/kurumemedj.MS661009. Epub 2020
May 1.

Comparative Evaluation of Mitochondrial Antioxidants in Oral Potentially
Malignant Disorders.

Banerjee S(1), Mukherjee S(2), Mitra S(3), Singhal P(4).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Oral Pathology and Microbiology, Dental College, Regional
Institute of Medical Sciences.
(2)Department of Biochemistry, Manipur University.
(3)Department of Oral Pathology, Burdwan Dental College and Hospital.
(4)AL-FALAH School of Medical Sciences and Research Center, AL- Falah University.

Various endogenous mitochondria-associated antioxidants protect mitochondria from
oxidative stresses such as Superoxide Dismutase 2 (SOD2), Catalase, Glutaredoxin 
2 (GLRX2), educed Glutathione (GSH), Glutathione Peroxidase (GPx), and
Thioredoxin 2 (TXN2). They protect mitochondria from Reactive Oxygen Species
(ROS). Excess ROS causes mitochondrial DNA damage and respiratory chain
dysfunction leading to carcinogenesis. In an earlier study we found complex
alterations of mitochondrial antioxidants in different stages of oral squamous
cell carcinoma. Here, we profiled mitochondrial antioxidants in different oral
potentially malignant disorders such as oral leukoplakia (OL), oral lichen planus
(OLP), and oral submucous fibrosis (OSMF). Mitochondria was prepared from oral
tissues from OL, OLP, and OSMF patients. Biochemical assays and immunoblotting
were performed to investigate expression of various mitochondrial antioxidants.
Catalase was expressed as Control> OL > OSMF > OLP. GLRX 2 was expressed as OLP> 
OL >Control >OSMF. GPX1 and GPX4 were expressed as Control >OSMF> OLP > OL. GSH
increased in OL and OSMP, but decreased in OLP. SOD2 was expressed as Control
>OSMF> OLP > OL. PRX3 was expressed as OL > OLP > OSMF > Control. TXN2 expression
was nearly the same in all groups except OL, which showed elevated expression. We
conclude that endogenous mitochondria-associated antioxidants show different
levels of expressions in various oral potentially malignant disorders.

DOI: 10.2739/kurumemedj.MS661009 
PMID: 32378537  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

