
1. Minerva Ginecol. 2020 Apr;72(2):70-74. doi: 10.23736/S0026-4784.20.04495-0.

Efficacy of food supplement Acidif plus® in the treatment of uncomplicated UTIs
in women: a pilot observational study.

Barletta C(1), Paccone M(2), Uccello N(1), Scaldarella LO(1), Romano C(1),
Mainini G(3), Passaro M(3).

Author information: 
(1)ASL Caserta, Caserta, Italy.
(2)ASL Caserta, Caserta, Italy - paccone.maria@outlook.it.
(3)ASL NA3 SUD, Naples, Italy.

BACKGROUND: Urinary tract infections (UTIs) are among the most common bacterial
infection diagnosed in women. The standard therapy is represented by short course
of anti-microbial treatment to eradicate causative pathogens. However, due to
antibiotic treatment, normal microbiota of the gastrointestinal tract is at risk 
of depletion and prolonged use of antibiotics can lead to the development of
resistant strains. The aim of this pilot study was to assess the efficacy of
Acidif plus®, a novel preparation containing L-Methionine, Boswellia serrata and 
Hibiscus sabdariffa, in the treatment of UTIs in women, in comparison with
standard antibiotic treatment with fosfomycin.
METHODS: We performed a pilot clinical study with 88 patients with uncomplicated 
UTIs treated in ambulatory care clinics. The subjects recruited in the study were
divided into two groups: the treatment group included 57 patients with both
symptomatic and asymptomatic uncomplicated, bacteriuria-positive UTIs, who were
treated by oral administration of Acidif plus® two tablets per day (1 tablet in
the morning and 1 tablet in the evening) for 7 days. The control group included
31 patients with both symptomatic and asymptomatic bacteriuria-positive
uncomplicated UTIs, treated with fosfomycin for two consecutive days. Clinical
improvement of symptoms and urine bacteriuria were evaluated as treatment
outcomes.
RESULTS: More than 50% of Acidif plus® treated patients were free of symptoms of 
UTIs at the end of the treatment regime. In addition, Acidif plus® treatment was 
effective in eliminating the bacterial infection in the post-treatment urine
cultures in more than 85% of the patients.
CONCLUSIONS: In this study Acidif plus® treatment in patients with uncomplicated 
UTIs was found to be non-inferior to the standard antibiotic therapy. In acute
setting, Acidif plus® was shown to be even more effective in alleviating the
symptoms than fosfomycin and in eliminating bacteria in urine cultures. It is
therefore possible to propose Acidif plus® as a potential alternative option to
reduce the problem of multi-drug resistance in urinary infections.

DOI: 10.23736/S0026-4784.20.04495-0 
PMID: 32403906 

