
1. Lett Appl Microbiol. 2020 Sep;71(3):259-271. doi: 10.1111/lam.13317. Epub 2020
Jun 4.

Antibacterial activity of Barbatimão (Stryphnodendron adstringens) against
Staphylococcus aureus: in vitro and in silico studies.

Trevisan DAC(1), da Silva PV(2), Farias ABP(1), Campanerut-Sá PAZ(1), Ribeiro
TDVR(3), Faria DR(1), de Mendonça PSB(1), de Mello JCP(3), Seixas FAV(2), Mikcha 
JMG(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Clinical Analysis and Biomedicine, State University of Maringá, 
Maringá, Brazil.
(2)Department of Technology, State University of Maringá, Maringá, Umuarama, PR, 
Brazil.
(3)Department of Pharmacy, State University of Maringá, Maringá, PR, Brazil.

We evaluated the activity of the aqueous fraction and the ethyl acetate fraction 
of Stryphnodendron adstringens against Staphylococcus aureus and proposed their
mechanism of action. The antibacterial activity of S. adstringens fractions was
evaluated against S. aureus and the cell targets were rated by docking. The
fractions showed moderate antibacterial activity against S. aureus without
toxicity on two mammalian cell lines. They also showed synergistic antibacterial 
activity with tannic acid (TA). In silico assays indicated FabG, FabZ and FabI as
probable targets. The metabolic pathway for fatty acid biosynthesis in S. aureus 
was affected by components of S. adstringens. The synergistic effect when
combining TA with S. adstringens fractions suggests a natural alternative to S.
aureus control. SIGNIFICANCE AND IMPACT OF THE STUDY: This is the first study
describing the possible targets of action of Stryphnodendron adstringens on
Staphylococcus aureus. Molecular dynamics simulations showed that the components 
of S. adstringens affected the metabolic pathway for fatty acid biosynthesis (FAS
II) in S. aureus, inhibiting the FabI, FabG and FabZ enzymes. As tannic acid (TA)
is a known inhibitor of some targets identified, we showed synergistic
antibacterial activity of S. adstringens in combination with TA. This combination
did not show toxicity against HaCaT and Vero cells and based on all these results
we suggest that S. adstringens can be a natural and sustainable alternative to S.
aureus control.

© 2020 The Society for Applied Microbiology.

DOI: 10.1111/lam.13317 
PMID: 32412089  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

