
1. Front Immunol. 2020 Apr 29;11:731. doi: 10.3389/fimmu.2020.00731. eCollection
2020.

Proteoglycan-Dependent Endo-Lysosomal Fusion Affects Intracellular Survival of
Salmonella Typhimurium in Epithelial Cells.

Galeev A(1), Suwandi A(1), Bakker H(2), Oktiviyari A(1), Routier FH(2), Krone
L(3), Hensel M(3), Grassl GA(1).

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Medical Microbiology and Hospital Epidemiology, Hannover Medical 
School and German Center for Infection Research (DZIF), Hanover, Germany.
(2)Institute of Clinical Biochemistry, Hannover Medical School, Hanover, Germany.
(3)Division of Microbiology, University of Osnabrück, Osnabrück, Germany.

Proteoglycans (PGs) are glycoconjugates which are predominately expressed on cell
surfaces and consist of glycosaminoglycans (GAGs) linked to a core protein. An
initial step of GAGs assembly is governed by the β-D-xylosyltransferase enzymes
encoded in mammals by the XylT1/XylT2 genes. PGs are essential for the
interaction of a cell with other cells as well as with the extracellular matrix. 
A number of studies highlighted a role of PGs in bacterial adhesion, invasion,
and immune response. In this work, we investigated a role of PGs in Salmonella
enterica serovar Typhimurium (S. Typhimurium) infection of epithelial cells.
Gentamicin protection and chloroquine resistance assays were applied to assess
invasion and replication of S. Typhimurium in wild-type and
xylosyltransferase-deficient (ΔXylT2) Chinese hamster ovary (CHO) cells lacking
PGs. We found that S. Typhimurium adheres to and invades CHO WT and CHO ΔXylT2
cells at comparable levels. However, 24 h after infection, proteoglycan-deficient
CHO ΔXylT2 cells are significantly less colonized by S. Typhimurium compared to
CHO WT cells. This proteoglycan-dependent phenotype could be rescued by addition 
of PGs to the cell culture medium, as well as by complementation of the XylT2
gene. Chloroquine resistance assay and immunostaining revealed that in the
absence of PGs, significantly less bacteria are associated with
Salmonella-containing vacuoles (SCVs) due to a re-distribution of endocytosed
gentamicin. Inhibition of endo-lysosomal fusion by a specific inhibitor of
phosphatidylinositol phosphate kinase PIKfyve significantly increased S.
Typhimurium burden in CHO ΔXylT2 cells demonstrating an important role of PGs for
PIKfyve dependent vesicle fusion which is modulated by Salmonella to establish
infection. Overall, our results demonstrate that PGs influence survival of
intracellular Salmonella in epithelial cells via modulation of PIKfyve-dependent 
endo-lysosomal fusion.

Copyright © 2020 Galeev, Suwandi, Bakker, Oktiviyari, Routier, Krone, Hensel and 
Grassl.

DOI: 10.3389/fimmu.2020.00731 
PMCID: PMC7201003
PMID: 32411142  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

