
1. Transfusion. 2020 Jul;60(7):1579-1589. doi: 10.1111/trf.15844. Epub 2020 May 15.

Evaluation of the procoagulant properties of a newly developed platelet modified 
lysate product.

Refaai MA(1), Conley GW(1), Hudson CA(2), Spinelli SL(1), Phipps RP(3), Morrell
CN(4), Blumberg N(1), McRae HL(1).

Author information: 
(1)Transfusion Medicine Division, Department of Pathology and Laboratory
Medicine, University of Rochester Medical Center, Rochester, New York, USA.
(2)Hematologics, Inc, Seattle, Washington, USA.
(3)Department of Environmental Medicine and Microbiology, University of Rochester
Medical Center, Rochester, New York, USA.
(4)Department of Cardiovascular Research, Cardiovascular Research Institute,
University of Rochester Medical Center, Rochester, New York, USA.

BACKGROUND: Platelet transfusion is associated with logistical problems with the 
national storage guidelines of platelets. This results in decreased function in
vivo as a result of the platelet storage lesion, and complications such as
allergic or hemolytic reactions and thrombosis. We evaluated a new, freshly
prepared platelet modified lysate (PML) product designed to be more procoagulant 
than fresh and stored platelets.
METHODS: Fresh platelets were concentrated, sonicated, and centrifuged to produce
PML. Samples of both washed and unwashed PML were evaluated for particle size,
concentration, and activity, and then tested for clot kinetics and thrombin
generation. PML samples were also stored at various temperatures for durations up
to 6 months and evaluated for clot kinetics and thrombin generation throughout.
RESULTS: PML showed significantly higher concentration of platelet
microparticles, increased procoagulant properties, and increased thrombin
generation as compared to fresh and stored platelets. In addition, PML maintained
its clot kinetics over a 6-month storage period with variable storage conditions.
CONCLUSIONS: The newly proposed PML product is more procoagulant, stable, and has
additional potential applications than currently available platelet products.
Further studies will be performed to assess its functions in vivo and to assess
thrombotic potential.

© 2020 AABB.

DOI: 10.1111/trf.15844 
PMID: 32415759 

