
1. Appl Environ Microbiol. 2020 Jul 20;86(15). pii: e00441-20. doi:
10.1128/AEM.00441-20. Print 2020 Jul 20.

The Sterol Carrier Hydroxypropyl-β-Cyclodextrin Enhances the Metabolism of
Phytosterols by Mycobacterium neoaurum.

Su L(#)(1)(2), Xu S(#)(1)(2), Shen Y(3)(2), Xia M(1)(2), Ren X(1)(2), Wang
L(1)(2), Shang Z(1)(2), Wang M(3)(2).

Author information: 
(1)Key Laboratory of Industrial Fermentation Microbiology (Tianjin University of 
Science and Technology), Ministry of Education, Tianjin, People's Republic of
China.
(2)Tianjin Key Laboratory of Industrial Microbiology, College of Biotechnology,
Tianjin University of Science and Technology, Tianjin, People's Republic of
China.
(3)Key Laboratory of Industrial Fermentation Microbiology (Tianjin University of 
Science and Technology), Ministry of Education, Tianjin, People's Republic of
China shenyb@tust.edu.cn minw@tust.edu.cn.
(#)Contributed equally

Androst-4-ene-3,17-dione (AD) and androst-1,4-diene-3,17-dione (ADD) are valuable
steroid pharmaceutical intermediates obtained by soybean phytosterol
biotransformation by Mycobacterium Cyclodextrins (CDs) are generally believed to 
be carriers for phytosterol delivery and can improve the production of AD and ADD
due to their effects on steroid solubilization and alteration in cell wall
permeability for steroids. To better understand the mechanisms of CD promotion,
we performed proteomic quantification of the effects of hydroxypropyl-β-CD
(HP-β-CD) on phytosterol metabolism in Mycobacterium neoaurum TCCC 11978 C2.
Perturbations are observed in steroid catabolism and glucose metabolism by adding
HP-β-CD in a phytosterol bioconversion system. AD and ADD, as metabolic products 
of phytosterol, are toxic to cells, with inhibited cell growth and biocatalytic
activity. Treatment of mycobacteria with HP-β-CD relieves the inhibitory effect
of AD(D) on the electron transfer chain and cell growth. These results
demonstrate the positive relationship between HP-β-CD and phytosterol metabolism 
and give insight into the complex functions of CDs as mediators of the regulation
of sterol metabolism.IMPORTANCE Phytosterols from soybean are low-cost
by-products of soybean oil production and, owing to their good bioavailability in
mycobacteria, are preferred as the substrates for steroid drug production via
biotransformation by Mycobacterium However, the low level of production of
steroid hormone drugs due to the low aqueous solubility (below 0.1 mmol/liter) of
phytosterols limits the commercial use of sterol-transformed strains. To improve 
the bioconversion of steroids, cyclodextrins (CDs) are generally used as an
effective carrier for the delivery of hydrophobic steroids to the bacterium. CDs 
improve the biotransformation of steroids due to their effects on steroid
solubilization and alterations in cell wall permeability for steroids. However,
studies have rarely reported the effects of CDs on cell metabolic pathways
related to sterols. In this study, the effects of hydroxypropyl-β-CD (HP-β-CD) on
the expression of enzymes related to steroid catabolic pathways in Mycobacterium 
neoaurum were systematically investigated. These findings will improve our
understanding of the complex functions of CDs in the regulation of sterol
metabolism and guide the application of CDs to sterol production.

Copyright © 2020 American Society for Microbiology.

DOI: 10.1128/AEM.00441-20 
PMCID: PMC7376554
PMID: 32414803  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

