
1. Microb Drug Resist. 2021 Jan;27(1):87-98. doi: 10.1089/mdr.2019.0384. Epub 2020
May 27.

Characterization of Multidrug-Resistant Isolates of Salmonella enterica Serovars 
Heidelberg and Minnesota from Fresh Poultry Meat Imported to Portugal.

Silveira L(1), Nunes A(2), Pista Â(1), Isidro J(2), Belo Correia C(3), Saraiva
M(4), Batista R(3), Castanheira I(3), Machado J(1), Gomes JP(2).

Author information: 
(1)National Reference Laboratory of Gastrointestinal Infections, Department of
Infectious Diseases, National Institute of Health, Lisbon, Portugal.
(2)Bioinformatics Unit, Department of Infectious Diseases, National Institute of 
Health (INSA), Lisbon, Portugal.
(3)Food Microbiology Laboratory, Reference Unit, Department of Food and
Nutrition, National Institute of Health, Lisbon, Portugal.
(4)Food Microbiology Laboratory, Reference Unit, Department of Food and
Nutrition, National Institute of Health, Porto, Portugal.

Salmonella enterica serovars Heidelberg and Minnesota frequently display several 
genetic mobile elements making them potential spreaders of resistance genes.
Here, we phenotypically determined the antibiotic resistance profile and
subsequently performed whole-genome sequencing on 36 isolates recovered from
samples of fresh poultry meat, within the Portuguese Official Inspection Plan for
Imported Foodstuffs. Several isolates of both serovars showed high genetic
relatedness either with isolates from raw poultry meat imported to the
Netherlands from Brazil or with isolates from samples from the broiler production
chain in Brazil. The multidrug-resistant (MDR) character was common to the vast
majority (94.4%) of isolates from both serovars, and several isolates carried the
plasmid IncA/C2 containing the β-lactamase gene blaCMY-2 and IncX1 containing a
type IV secretion system. These results somehow mirror the scenario observed in
the Netherlands, showing the introduction, through fresh imported poultry meat in
compliance with European legislation, of MDR Salmonella enterica serovars
Heidelberg and Minnesota in Europe, with the potential spread of resistance
markers. These data suggest the need to revise the hygiene criteria for
foodstuffs monitoring before its placement on the market, with the determination 
of the resistome being an invaluable contribute to limit the dissemination of
resistance markers.

DOI: 10.1089/mdr.2019.0384 
PMID: 32460607 

