
1. J Hepatobiliary Pancreat Sci. 2020 Aug;27(8):477-486. doi: 10.1002/jhbp.772. Epub
2020 Jul 13.

Difference in driver gene expression patterns between perihilar and peripheral
intrahepatic cholangiocarcinoma in an experimental mouse model.

Adachi T(1), Adachi T(1), Nakagaki T(2), Ono S(1), Hidaka M(1), Ito S(1),
Kanetaka K(1), Takatsuki M(1), Nishida N(2), Eguchi S(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Surgery, Graduate School of Biomedical Sciences, Nagasaki
University, Nagasaki, Japan.
(2)Department of Molecular Microbiology and Immunology, Nagasaki University
Graduate School of Biomedical Sciences, Nagasaki, Japan.

BACKGROUND: The prognosis of intrahepatic cholangiocarcinoma (ICC) is based on
tumor localization; however, the mechanism remains unknown. Therefore, we
investigated the biological characteristics of perihilar and peripheral ICC in a 
mouse model.
METHODS: The model was established by the administration of three oncogenic
plasmids harboring myristoylated AKT, mutated human YAP, and pCMV-Sleeping Beauty
into the mice. The perihilar and peripheral ICC tumors that developed in the same
mouse were assessed for the expression of cell adhesion factors and driver genes 
with immunohistochemistry and reverse transcription polymerase chain reaction
(RT-PCR).
RESULTS: The perihilar ICC tumors were irregularly shaped, whereas the peripheral
tumors were mostly circular, similar to the differences found in patients.
Alpha-smooth muscle actin was strongly expressed in the perihilar tumors at
10 weeks, and vimentin expression was significantly up-regulated in the perihilar
ICC at 14 weeks. Fgfr2 level significantly increased in peripheral ICC at
10 weeks, whereas Idh2 expression was up-regulated in perihilar ICC.
CONCLUSIONS: Despite diffuse injection of oncogenic plasmid, expression of driver
genes and oncogenes in ICC tumor cells differs depending on the tumor
localization, resulting in changes in epithelial-mesenchymal transition, which
may explain the different outcomes of patients with peripheral and perihilar ICC.

© 2020 Japanese Society of Hepato-Biliary-Pancreatic Surgery.

DOI: 10.1002/jhbp.772 
PMID: 32463951 

