
1. Front Immunol. 2020 May 6;11:796. doi: 10.3389/fimmu.2020.00796. eCollection
2020.

Concurrent Immune Suppression and Hyperinflammation in Patients With
Community-Acquired Pneumonia.

Brands X(1), Haak BW(1), Klarenbeek AM(1), Otto NA(1), Faber DR(2), Lutter R(3), 
Scicluna BP(1)(4), Wiersinga WJ(1)(5), van der Poll T(1)(5).

Author information: 
(1)Center for Experimental and Molecular Medicine (CEMM), Amsterdam University
Medical Centers - Location AMC, University of Amsterdam, Amsterdam, Netherlands.
(2)Department of Internal Medicine, BovenIJ Hospital, Amsterdam, Netherlands.
(3)Respiratory Medicine and Experimental Immunology, Amsterdam University Medical
Centers - Location AMC, University of Amsterdam, Amsterdam, Netherlands.
(4)Department of Clinical Epidemiology, Biostatistics and Bioinformatics,
Amsterdam University Medical Centers - Location AMC, University of Amsterdam,
Amsterdam, Netherlands.
(5)Division of Infectious Diseases, Amsterdam University Medical Centers -
Location AMC, University of Amsterdam, Amsterdam, Netherlands.

Background: The nature and timing of the host immune response during infections
remain uncertain and most knowledge is derived from critically ill sepsis
patients. We aimed to test the hypothesis that community-acquired pneumonia (CAP)
is associated with concurrent immune suppression and systemic inflammation.
Methods: Blood was collected from 79 CAP patients within 24 h after
hospitalization and 1 month after discharge; 42 age- and sex-matched subjects
without acute infection served as controls. Blood leukocytes were stimulated with
lipopolysaccharide (LPS) or Klebsiella pneumoniae, and cytokines were measured in
supernatants. Fifteen plasma biomarkers reflective of key host response pathways 
were compared between CAP patients with the strongest immune suppression (lowest 
25% blood leukocyte tumor necrosis factor (TNF)-α production in response to LPS) 
and those with the least immune suppression (highest 25% of LPS-induced TNF-α
production).
Results: Blood leukocytes of CAP patients (relative to control subjects) showed a
reduced capacity to release TNF-α, interleukin (IL)-1β, IL-6 and IL-10 upon
stimulation with LPS or K. pneumoniae, with a concurrently enhanced ability to
release the anti-inflammatory mediator IL-1 receptor antagonist, irrespective of 
the presence of sepsis (18.9% of cases). Low (relative to high) TNF-α producers
displayed higher plasma levels of biomarkers reflecting systemic inflammation,
neutrophil degranulation, endothelial cell activation, a disturbed vascular
barrier function and coagulation activation.
Conclusion: CAP replicates a common feature of immune suppression in sepsis. The 
coexistence of immune suppression and hyperinflammation in CAP argues against the
theory of two distinct phases during the host response to sepsis.

Copyright © 2020 Brands, Haak, Klarenbeek, Otto, Faber, Lutter, Scicluna,
Wiersinga and van der Poll.

DOI: 10.3389/fimmu.2020.00796 
PMCID: PMC7232566
PMID: 32477337  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

