
1. Int J Mol Cell Med. 2019 Summer;8(3):169-178. doi: 10.22088/IJMCM.BUMS.8.3.169.

Whole Exome Sequencing Revealed a Novel GJB1 Pathogenic Variant and a Rare BSCL2 
Mutation in Two Iranian Large Pedigrees with Multiple Affected Cases of
Charcot-Marie-Tooth.

Mohsenpour N(1), Roknizadeh H(2), Maghbooli M(3), Changi-Ashtiani M(4), Shahrooei
M(5)(6), Salehi M(7)(8), Behnam M(7), Shahani T(1), Biglari A(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Genetics and Molecular Medicine, School of Medicine, Zanjan
University of Medical Sciences (ZUMS), Zanjan, Iran.
(2)Department of Medical Biotechnology, School of Medicine, Zanjan University of 
Medical Sciences (ZUMS), Zanjan, Iran.
(3)Department of Neurology, School of Medicine, Zanjan University of Medical
Sciences (ZUMS), Zanjan, Iran.
(4)School of Mathematics, Institute for Research in Fundamental Sciences (IPM),
Tehran, Iran.
(5)Experimental Laboratory Immunology, Department of Microbiology and Immunology,
KU Leuven, Leuven, Belgium.
(6)Specialized Immunology Laboratory of Dr. Shahrooei, Ahvaz, Iran.
(7)Cellular, Molecular and Genetics Research Center, Isfahan University of
Medical Sciences, Isfahan, Iran.
(8)Department of Genetics, Medical School, Isfahan University of Medical
Sciences, Isfahan, Iran.

Charcot-Marie-Tooth disease (CMT) is the most common hereditary neuropathy of the
peripheral nervous system with a wide range of severity and age of onset. CMT
patients share similar phenotypes which make it often impossible to identify the 
disease types based on clinical presentation and electrophysiological studies
alone. In recent years, novel genetic diagnostic approaches such as whole exome
sequencing (WES) has provided a ground for accurate diagnosis of CMT through
identification of the disease-causing mutation(s). In the present study, that
approach was effectively employed. Two unrelated large pedigrees with multiple
affected cases of various pattern of inheritance (one autosomal dominant and one 
X-linked) were included. Clinical and electrophysiological data were obtained.
DNA sample from each pedigree's proband was subjected to WES. Data analysis was
performed using an in-house developed pipeline, adopted from GATK and ANNOVAR.
Candidate variant segregation was evaluated by PCR-based Sanger sequencing. A
known but extremely rare (unreported in the Middle Easterners) mutation in BSCL2 
(c.C269T:p.S90L) as well as a novel hemizygous variant in GJB1 (c.G224C:p.R75P)
were identified and segregations were confirmed by Sanger sequencing. This study 
supports effectiveness of WES for genetic diagnosis of CMT in undiagnosed
families.

DOI: 10.22088/IJMCM.BUMS.8.3.169 
PMCID: PMC7241839
PMID: 32489946 

