
1. J Immunother Cancer. 2020 Jun;8(1). pii: e000233. doi: 10.1136/jitc-2019-000233. 
Epub 2020 Jun 8.

Restoration of antitumor immunity through anti-MICA antibodies elicited with a
chimeric protein.

Torres N(1), Regge MV(1), Secchiari F(1), Friedrich AD(1), Spallanzani RG(1),
Raffo Iraolagoitia XL(1), Núñez SY(1), Sierra JM(1), Ziblat A(1), Santilli MC(1),
Gilio N(1), Almada E(1), Lauche C(2), Pardo R(2), Domaica CI(1), Fuertes MB(1),
Madauss KP(3), Hance KW(4), Gloger IS(5), Zylberman V(2), Goldbaum FA(2)(6),
Zwirner NW(7)(8).

Author information: 
(1)Laboratorio de Fisiopatología de la Inmunidad Innata, Instituto de Biologia y 
Medicina Experimental, Buenos Aires, Argentina.
(2)Inmunova, Buenos Aires, Argentina.
(3)Trust in Science, Global Health R&D, GlaxoSmithKline, Collegeville, PA, United
States.
(4)Oncology, GlaxoSmithKline, Collegeville, PA, United States.
(5)Trust in Science, Global Health R&D, GlaxoSmithKline, Stevenage, United
Kingdom.
(6)Fundación Instituto Leloir, Instituto de Investigaciones Bioquímicas de Buenos
Aires, Buenos Aires, Argentina.
(7)Laboratorio de Fisiopatología de la Inmunidad Innata, Instituto de Biologia y 
Medicina Experimental, Buenos Aires, Argentina nzwirner@ibyme.conicet.gov.ar.
(8)Departamento de Química Biológica, Facultad de Ciencias Exactas y Naturales,
Universidad de Buenos Aires, Buenos Aires, Argentina.

BACKGROUND: Natural killer and cytotoxic CD8+ T cells are major players during
antitumor immunity. They express NKG2D, an activating receptor that promotes
tumor elimination through recognition of the MHC class I chain-related proteins A
and B (MICA and MICB). Both molecules are overexpressed on a great variety of
tumors from different tissues, making them attractive targets for immunotherapy. 
However, tumors shed MICA and MICB, and the soluble forms of both (sMICA and
sMICB) mediate tumor-immune escape. Some reports indicate that anti-MICA
antibodies (Ab) can promote the restoration of antitumor immunity through the
induction of direct antitumor effects (antibody-dependent cell-mediated
cytotoxicity, ADCC) and scavenging of sMICA. Therefore, we reasoned that an
active induction of anti-MICA Ab with an immunogenic protein might represent a
novel therapeutic and prophylactic alternative to restore antitumor immunity.
METHODS: We generated a highly immunogenic chimeric protein (BLS-MICA) consisting
of human MICA fused to the lumazine synthase from Brucella spp (BLS) and used it 
to generate anti-MICA polyclonal Ab (pAb) and to investigate if these anti-MICA
Ab can reinstate antitumor immunity in mice using two different mouse tumors
engineered to express MICA. We also explored the underlying mechanisms of this
expected therapeutic effect.
RESULTS: Immunization with BLS-MICA and administration of anti-MICA pAb elicited 
by BLS-MICA significantly delayed the growth of MICA-expressing mouse tumors but 
not of control tumors. The therapeutic effect of immunization with BLS-MICA
included scavenging of sMICA and the anti-MICA Ab-mediated ADCC, promoting
heightened intratumoral M1/proinflammatory macrophage and antigen-experienced
CD8+ T cell recruitment.
CONCLUSIONS: Immunization with the chimeric protein BLS-MICA constitutes a useful
way to actively induce therapeutic anti-MICA pAb that resulted in a reprogramming
of the antitumor immune response towards an antitumoral/proinflammatory
phenotype. Hence, the BLS-MICA chimeric protein constitutes a novel antitumor
vaccine of potential application in patients with MICA-expressing tumors.

© Author(s) (or their employer(s)) 2020. Re-use permitted under CC BY-NC. No
commercial re-use. See rights and permissions. Published by BMJ.

DOI: 10.1136/jitc-2019-000233 
PMCID: PMC7282397
PMID: 32518090  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing interests: None declared.

