
1. Nutrients. 2020 Jun 11;12(6). pii: E1750. doi: 10.3390/nu12061750.

Effect of Astaxanthin on Activation of Autophagy and Inhibition of Apoptosis in
Helicobacter pylori-Infected Gastric Epithelial Cell Line AGS.

Lee H(1), Lim JW(1), Kim H(1).

Author information: 
(1)Brain Korea 21 PLUS Project, Department of Food and Nutrition, College of
Human Ecology, Yonsei University, Seoul 03722, Korea.

Helicobacter pylori (H. pylori) infection leads to the massive apoptosis of the
gastric epithelial cells, causing gastric ulcers, gastritis, and gastric
adenocarcinoma. Autophagy is a cellular recycling process that plays important
roles in cell death decisions and can protect cells by preventing apoptosis. Upon
the induction of autophagy, the level of the autophagy substrate p62 is reduced
and the autophagy-related ratio of microtubule-associated proteins 1A/1B light
chain 3B (LC3B)-II/LC3B-I is heightened. AMP-activated protein kinase (AMPK) and 
mammalian target of rapamycin (mTOR) are involved in the regulation of autophagy.
Astaxanthin (AST) is a potent anti-oxidant that plays anti-inflammatory and
anti-cancer roles in various cells. In the present study, we examined whether AST
inhibits H. pylori-induced apoptosis through AMPK-mediated autophagy in the human
gastric epithelial cell line AGS (adenocarcinoma gastric) in vitro. In this
study, H. pylori induced apoptosis. Compound C, an AMPK inhibitor, enhanced the
H. pylori-induced apoptosis of AGS cells. In contrast, metformin, an AMPK
activator, suppressed H. pylori-induced apoptosis, showing that AMPK activation
inhibits H. pylori-induced apoptosis. AST inhibited H. pylori-induced apoptosis
by increasing the phosphorylation of AMPK and decreasing the phosphorylation of
RAC-alpha serine/threonine-protein kinase (Akt) and mTOR in H. pylori-stimulated 
cells. The number of LC3B puncta in H. pylori-stimulated cells increased with
AST. These results suggest that AST suppresses the H. pylori-induced apoptosis of
AGS cells by inducing autophagy through the activation of AMPK and the
downregulation of its downstream target, mTOR. In conclusion, AST may inhibit
gastric diseases associated with H. pylori infection by increasing autophagy
through the activation of the AMPK pathway.

DOI: 10.3390/nu12061750 
PMCID: PMC7353244
PMID: 32545395  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

