
1. J Periodontal Res. 2020 Dec;55(6):821-829. doi: 10.1111/jre.12773. Epub 2020 Jun 
18.

Anti-inflammatory and macrophage polarization effects of Cranberry
Proanthocyanidins (PACs) for periodontal and peri-implant disease therapy.

Galarraga-Vinueza ME(1)(2), Dohle E(3), Ramanauskaite A(1)(4), Al-Maawi S(3),
Obreja K(1), Magini R(2), Sader R(5), Ghanaati S(3), Schwarz F(1)(4).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Oral Surgery and Implantology, Carolinum, Johann Wolfgang
Goethe-University Frankfurt, Frankfurt, Germany.
(2)Post-Graduate Program in Implant Dentistry (PPGO), Federal University of Santa
Catarina (UFSC), Florianópolis, Brazil.
(3)FORM-Lab, Frankfurt Oral Regenerative Medicine, Department for Oral,
Cranio-Maxillofacial and Facial Plastic Surgery, Medical Center of the Goethe
University Frankfurt, Frankfurt, Germany.
(4)Department of Oral Surgery, Universitätsklinikum Düsseldorf, Düsseldorf,
Germany.
(5)Department for Oral, Cranio-Maxillofacial and Facial Plastic Surgery, Medical 
Center of the Goethe University Frankfurt, Frankfurt am Main, Germany.

BACKGROUND AND OBJECTIVE: Macrophages' cytokine expression and polarization play 
a substantial role in the host's "destructive" inflammatory response to
periodontal and peri-implant pathogens. This study aimed to evaluate cell
viability, anti-inflammatory activity, and macrophage polarization properties of 
different cranberry concentrates.
METHODS: THP-1 cells (monocytic line) were treated with phorbol myristic acid to 
induce macrophage differentiation. Human gingival fibroblasts (HFIB-G cell line),
osteosarcoma-derived osteoblasts (SAOS-2 cell line), and induced macrophages were
treated with cranberry concentrates at 25, 50, and 100 µg/mL for 120 seconds,
1 hour and 24 hours. Untreated cells at the same time points served as controls. 
For anti-inflammatory analysis, induced macrophages exposed to cranberry
concentrates (A-type PACs) were stimulated with lipopolysaccharides (LPS) derived
from E coli for 24 hours. Cell viability, interleukin (IL)-8, IL-1 ß, IL-6, and
IL-10 expression of LPS-stimulated macrophages, and macrophage polarization
markers were evaluated through determination of live-cell protease activity,
enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay, and immunofluorescence staining
semi-quantification.
RESULTS: Cranberry concentrates (A-type PACs) did not reduce HGF, SAOS-2, and
macrophage viability after 24 hours of exposure. Pro-inflammatory cytokine
expression (ie IL-8 and IL-6) was downregulated in LPS-stimulated macrophages by 
cranberry concentrates at 50 and 100 µg/mL. Anti-inflammatory IL-10 expression
was significantly upregulated in LPS-stimulated macrophages by cranberry
concentrates at 100 µg/mL after 24 hours of exposure. M1 polarization
significantly decreased when LPS-stimulated macrophages were exposed to cranberry
concentrates. High levels of positive M1 macrophages were present in all
untreated control groups. M2 polarization significantly increased at all
LPS-stimulated macrophages exposed to cranberry concentrates for 1 and 24 hours.
CONCLUSION: Cranberry-derived proanthocyanidins may have the potential to act as 
an anti-inflammatory component in the therapy of periodontal and peri-implant
diseases.

© 2020 The Authors. Journal of Periodontal Research published by John Wiley &
Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/jre.12773 
PMID: 32557637  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

