
1. Inflamm Bowel Dis. 2021 Jan 19;27(2):256-267. doi: 10.1093/ibd/izaa145.

Colonoids From Patients With Pediatric Inflammatory Bowel Disease Exhibit
Decreased Growth Associated With Inflammation Severity and Durable Upregulation
of Antigen Presentation Genes.

Kelsen JR(1), Dawany N(2), Conrad MA(1), Karakasheva TA(1), Maurer K(3), Wei
JM(1), Uman S(4), Dent MH(1), Behera R(1), Bryant LM(1), Ma X(1), Moreira L(5),
Chatterji P(6), Shraim R(1), Merz A(1), Mizuno R(7), Simon LA(1), Muir AB(1),
Giraudo C(8), Behrens EM(9), Whelan KA(10), Devoto M(11)(12), Russo PA(13),
Andres SF(14), Sullivan KE(3), Hamilton KE(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Division of Gastroenterology, Hepatology, and
Nutrition, Children's Hospital of Philadelphia, Philadelphia, PA, United States.
(2)Department of Biomedical and Health Informatics, Children's Hospital of
Philadelphia, Philadelphia, PA, United States.
(3)Division of Allergy Immunology, Children's Hospital of Philadelphia,
Philadelphia, PA, United States.
(4)Department of Bioengineering, University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, PA,
United States.
(5)Department of Gastroenterology, Hospital Clinic, Centro de Investigacion
Biomedica en Red en Enfermedades Hepaticas y Digestivas (CIBERehd), IDIBAPS,
University of Barcelona, Catalonia, Spain.
(6)Department of Medical Oncology, Dana-Farber Cancer Institute, Harvard Medical 
School, Boston, MA, United States.
(7)Department of Medicine, Gastroenterology Division, University of Pennsylvania,
Philadelphia, PA, United States.
(8)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, Sidney Kimmel Medical College,
Thomas Jefferson University, Philadelphia, PA, United States.
(9)Division of Rheumatology, Children's Hospital of Philadelphia, Philadelphia,
PA, United States.
(10)Fels Institute for Cancer Research & Molecular Biology, Department of
Pathology and Laboratory Medicine, Lewis Katz School of Medicine at Temple
University, Philadelphia, PA, United States.
(11)Division of Genetics, Department of Pediatrics, Children's Hospital of
Philadelphia, Perelman School of Medicine, University of Pennsylvania,
Philadelphia, PA, United States.
(12)Division of Anatomic Pathology, Children's Hospital of Philadelphia,
Philadelphia, PA, United States.
(13)Department of Pediatrics, Oregon Health & Science University, Portland, OR,
United States.
(14)Department of Translational and Precision Medicine, University of Rome
Sapienza, Rome, Italy.

BACKGROUND: Defining epithelial cell contributions to inflammatory bowel disease 
(IBD) is essential for the development of much needed therapies for barrier
repair. Children with very early onset (VEO)-IBD have more extensive, severe, and
refractory disease than older children and adults with IBD and, in some cases,
have defective barrier function. We therefore evaluated functional and
transcriptomic differences between pediatric IBD (VEO and older onset) and
non-IBD epithelium using 3-dimensional, biopsy-derived organoids.
METHODS: We measured growth efficiency relative to histopathological and clinical
parameters in patient enteroid (ileum) and colonoid (colon) lines. We performed
RNA-sequencing on patient colonoids and subsequent flow cytometry after multiple 
passages to evaluate changes that persisted in culture.
RESULTS: Enteroids and colonoids from pediatric patients with IBD exhibited
decreased growth associated with histological inflammation compared with non-IBD 
controls. We observed increased LYZ expression in colonoids from pediatric IBD
patients, which has been reported previously in adult patients with IBD. We also 
observed upregulation of antigen presentation genes HLA-DRB1 and HLA-DRA, which
persisted after prolonged passaging in patients with pediatric IBD.
CONCLUSIONS: We present the first functional evaluation of enteroids and
colonoids from patients with VEO-IBD and older onset pediatric IBD, a subset of
which exhibits poor growth. Enhanced, persistent epithelial antigen presentation 
gene expression in patient colonoids supports the notion that epithelial
cell-intrinsic differences may contribute to IBD pathogenesis.

© 2020 Crohn’s & Colitis Foundation. Published by Oxford University Press. All
rights reserved. For permissions, please e-mail: journals.permissions@oup.com.

DOI: 10.1093/ibd/izaa145 
PMCID: PMC7813751 [Available on 2021-06-19]
PMID: 32556182 

