
1. Am J Clin Pathol. 2020 Oct 13;154(5):627-634. doi: 10.1093/ajcp/aqaa067.

Voxelotor Treatment Interferes With Quantitative and Qualitative Hemoglobin
Variant Analysis in Multiple Sickle Cell Disease Genotypes.

Rutherford-Parker NJ(1), Campbell ST(2), Colby JM(1)(3), Shajani-Yi Z(1)(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Microbiology and Immunology, Vanderbilt University
Medical Center, Nashville, TN.
(2)Department of Pathology, Montefiore Medical Center, Moses Division, The Bronx,
NY.
(3)Department of Pathology, Microbiology and Immunology, Vanderbilt University
School of Medicine, Nashville, TN.

OBJECTIVES: Voxelotor was recently approved for use in the United States as a
treatment for sickle cell disease (SCD) and has been shown to interfere with the 
quantitation of hemoglobin (Hb) S percentage. This study aimed to determine the
effect of voxelotor on the quantitation of hemoglobin variant levels in patients 
with multiple SCD genotypes.
METHODS: In vitro experiments were performed to assess the impact of voxelotor
treatment on hemoglobin variant testing. Whole blood samples were incubated with 
voxelotor and then analyzed by routinely used quantitative and qualitative
clinical laboratory methods (high-performance liquid chromatography [HPLC],
capillary zone electrophoresis [CZE], and acid and alkaline electrophoresis).
RESULTS: Voxelotor modified the α-globin chain of multiple hemoglobins, including
HbA, HbS, HbC, HbD-Punjab, HbE, HbA2, and HbF. These voxelotor-hemoglobin
complexes prevented accurate quantitation of multiple hemoglobin species,
including HbS, by HPLC and CZE.
CONCLUSIONS: Technical limitations in quantifying HbS percentage may preclude the
use of HPLC or CZE for monitoring patients treated with voxelotor. Furthermore,
it is unclear whether HbS-voxelotor complexes are clinically equivalent to HbS.
Consensus guidelines for reporting hemoglobin variant percentages for patients
taking voxelotor are needed, as these values are necessary for determining the
number of RBC units to exchange in acute situations.

© American Society for Clinical Pathology, 2020. All rights reserved. For
permissions, please e-mail: journals.permissions@oup.com.

DOI: 10.1093/ajcp/aqaa067 
PMID: 32561909  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

