
1. Infect Immun. 2020 Aug 19;88(9). pii: e00212-20. doi: 10.1128/IAI.00212-20. Print
2020 Aug 19.

Differential Interactions of Serum and Bronchoalveolar Lavage Fluid Complement
Proteins with Conidia of Airborne Fungal Pathogen Aspergillus fumigatus.

Wong SSW(1), Daniel I(2), Gangneux JP(3), Jayapal JM(2), Guegan H(3), Dellière
S(1)(4), Lalitha P(5), Shende R(6), Madan T(7), Bayry J(8), Guijarro JI(9),
Kuppamuthu D(2), Aimanianda V(10).

Author information: 
(1)Institut Pasteur, Molecular Mycology Unit, CNRS, UMR2000, Paris, France.
(2)Department of Proteomics and Ocular Microbiology, Aravind Medical Research
Foundation, Madurai, Tamil Nadu, India.
(3)University of Rennes, CHU Rennes, Inserm, EHESP, Irset (Institut de Recherche 
en santé, environnement et travail)-UMR_S 1085, Rennes, France.
(4)Parasitology-Mycology Laboratory, Groupe Hospitalier
Saint-Louis-Lariboisière-Fernand-Widal, Assistance Publique-Hôpitaux de Paris,
Université de Paris, Paris, France.
(5)Department of Ocular Microbiology, Aravind Eye Hospital, Madurai, Tamil Nadu, 
India.
(6)National Centre for Cell Sciences, University of Pune, Pune, Maharashtra,
India.
(7)National Institute for Research in Reproductive Health, Indian Council of
Medical Research, Mumbai, Maharashtra, India.
(8)Institut National de la Santé et de la Recherche Médicale, Centre de Recherché
des Cordeliers, Sorbonne Université, Université de Paris, Paris, France.
(9)Institut Pasteur, Biological NMR Technological Platform, CNRS UMR 3528, Paris,
France.
(10)Institut Pasteur, Molecular Mycology Unit, CNRS, UMR2000, Paris, France
vkumar@pasteur.fr.

Even though both cellular and humoral immunities contribute to host defense, the 
role played by humoral immunity against the airborne opportunistic fungal
pathogen Aspergillus fumigatus has been underexplored. In this study, we aimed at
deciphering the role of the complement system, the major humoral immune
component, against A. fumigatus Mass spectrometry analysis of the proteins
extracted from A. fumigatus conidial (asexual spores and infective propagules)
surfaces opsonized with human serum indicated that C3 is the major complement
protein involved. Flow cytometry and immunolabeling assays further confirmed C3b 
(activated C3) deposition on the conidial surfaces. Assays using cell wall
components of conidia indicated that the hydrophobin RodAp, β-(1,3)-glucan (BG)
and galactomannan (GM) could efficiently activate C3. Using complement
component-depleted sera, we showed that while RodAp activates C3 by the
alternative pathway, BG and GM partially follow the classical and lectin
pathways, respectively. Opsonization facilitated conidial aggregation and
phagocytosis, and complement receptor (CR3 and CR4) blockage on phagocytes
significantly inhibited phagocytosis, indicating that the complement system
exerts a protective role against conidia by opsonizing them and facilitating
their phagocytosis mainly through complement receptors. Conidial opsonization
with human bronchoalveolar lavage fluid (BALF) confirmed C3 to be the major
complement protein interacting with conidia. Nevertheless, complement C2 and
mannose-binding lectin (MBL), the classical and lectin pathway components,
respectively, were not identified, indicating that BALF activates the alternative
pathway on the conidial surface. Moreover, the cytokine profiles were different
upon stimulation of phagocytes with serum- and BALF-opsonized conidia,
highlighting the importance of studying interaction of conidia with complement
proteins in their biological niche.

Copyright © 2020 American Society for Microbiology.

DOI: 10.1128/IAI.00212-20 
PMCID: PMC7440762
PMID: 32571987  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

