
1. Cytotherapy. 2020 Nov;22(11):690-697. doi: 10.1016/j.jcyt.2020.04.039. Epub 2020 
Jun 24.

Transient warming affects potency of cryopreserved cord blood units.

Pasha R(1), Howell A(2), Turner TR(2), Halpenny M(3), Elmoazzen H(3), Acker
JP(4), Pineault N(5).

Author information: 
(1)Canadian Blood Services, Centre for Innovation, Ottawa, Ontario, Canada.
(2)Canadian Blood Services, Centre for Innovation, Edmonton, Alberta, Canada.
(3)Canadian Blood Services, Cord Blood Bank and Stem Cell Manufacturing, Ottawa, 
Canada.
(4)University of Alberta, Department of Laboratory Medicine and Pathology,
Edmonton, Alberta, Canada.
(5)University of Ottawa, Biochemistry, Microbiology and Immunology Department,
Ottawa, Canada. Electronic address: nicolas.pineault@blood.ca.

BACKGROUND AIMS: Cryopreserved cord blood units (CBUs) can be exposed to
transient warming events (TWEs) during routine banking operations, which may
affect their potency. NetCord-FACT guidelines recommend removal of these CBUs
from inventory. The objective of this work was to evaluate warming kinetics of
frozen CBUs in different settings to determine the optimal working environment
and define the impact of different TWE scenarios on CB post-thaw quality and
potency.
METHODS: The warming kinetics of frozen CBUs was influenced by both working
surfaces and ambient working temperature, with cold plates providing better
protection than vinyl or metal surfaces. Measurement of time for required
operational activities revealed that CBUs are probably exposed to core
temperatures greater than -150°C even when cold plates are used to reduce warming
rates.
RESULTS: On the basis of the warming kinetics and observed operational
activities, three TWE causing scenarios (control, typical, worst case) were
investigated using a pool-and-split design and cell viability, recovery and
potency (colony-forming unit [CFU]) assays were performed. TWEs were found to
have little impact on the recovery of total nucleated cells or on the viability
of CD34+ cells. In contrast, the viability and recovery of CD45+ cells in the
smaller CBU compartments were reduced by TWEs. Moreover, the worst-case TWE
reduced CFU recovery from CBUs, whereas the typical-scenario TWE had little
effect.
CONCLUSIONS: Our results demonstrate that the distal segment underestimates the
viability and potency of CBUs and that TWEs can affect the post-thaw viability
and potency of CBUs. Although TWEs are almost inevitable during cord-blood
banking operations, their effects must be diminished by reducing exposure time,
using cold plates and strict operational protocols, to prevent worst-case TWEs.

Crown Copyright © 2020. Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jcyt.2020.04.039 
PMID: 32591113  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

