
1. Orphanet J Rare Dis. 2020 Jun 30;15(1):170. doi: 10.1186/s13023-020-01437-1.

High content drug screening for Fanconi anemia therapeutics.

Montanuy H(1), Camps-Fajol C(1)(2), Carreras-Puigvert J(1)(2)(3), Häggblad
M(4)(5), Lundgren B(6), Aza-Carmona M(7)(8), Helleday T(4), Minguillón
J(1)(3)(9), Surrallés J(10)(11)(12)(13).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Genetics and Microbiology, Universitat Autònoma de Barcelona,
Barcelona, Spain.
(2)Join Research Unit on Genomic Medicine UAB-Sant Pau, Biomedical Research
Institute, Hospital de la Santa Creu i Sant Pau, Barcelona, Spain.
(3)Centro de Investigación Biomédica en Red de Enfermedades raras, Barcelona,
Spain.
(4)Division of Translational Medicine and Chemical Biology, Science for Life
Laboratory, Department of Molecular Biochemistry and Biophysics, Karolinska
Institutet, Stockholm, Sweden.
(5)Currently at Division of Genome Biology, Science for Life Laboratory,
Department of Molecular Biochemistry and Biophysics, Karolinska Institutet,
Stockholm, Sweden.
(6)Department of Biochemistry and Biophysics, SciLifelab, Stockholm University,
Stockholm, SE, Sweden.
(7)Institute of Medical and Molecular Genetics and Skeletal dysplasia
multidisciplinary Unit, Hospital Universitario La Paz, Universidad Autónoma de
Madrid, IdiPaz, Madrid, Spain.
(8)Centro de Investigación Biomédica en Red de Enfermedades Raras, Madrid, Spain.
(9)Genetics Department, Hospital de la Santa Creu i Sant Pau, Barcelona, Spain.
(10)Department of Genetics and Microbiology, Universitat Autònoma de Barcelona,
Barcelona, Spain. Jordi.surralles@uab.cat.
(11)Join Research Unit on Genomic Medicine UAB-Sant Pau, Biomedical Research
Institute, Hospital de la Santa Creu i Sant Pau, Barcelona, Spain.
Jordi.surralles@uab.cat.
(12)Centro de Investigación Biomédica en Red de Enfermedades raras, Barcelona,
Spain. Jordi.surralles@uab.cat.
(13)Genetics Department, Hospital de la Santa Creu i Sant Pau, Barcelona, Spain. 
Jordi.surralles@uab.cat.

BACKGROUND: Fanconi anemia is a rare disease clinically characterized by
malformations, bone marrow failure and an increased risk of solid tumors and
hematologic malignancies. The only therapies available are hematopoietic stem
cell transplantation for bone marrow failure or leukemia, and surgical resection 
for solid tumors. Therefore, there is still an urgent need for new therapeutic
options. With this aim, we developed a novel high-content cell-based screening
assay to identify drugs with therapeutic potential in FA.
RESULTS: A TALEN-mediated FANCA-deficient U2OS cell line was stably transfected
with YFP-FANCD2 fusion protein. These cells were unable to form fluorescent foci 
or to monoubiquitinate endogenous or exogenous FANCD2 upon DNA damage and were
more sensitive to mitomycin C when compared to the parental wild type
counterpart. FANCA correction by retroviral infection restored the cell line's
ability to form FANCD2 foci and ubiquitinate FANCD2. The feasibility of this
cell-based system was interrogated in a high content screening of 3802 compounds,
including a Prestwick library of 1200 FDA-approved drugs. The potential hits
identified were then individually tested for their ability to rescue FANCD2 foci 
and monoubiquitination, and chromosomal stability in the absence of FANCA.
CONCLUSIONS: While, unfortunately, none of the compounds tested were able to
restore cellular FANCA-deficiency, our study shows the potential capacity to
screen large compound libraries in the context of Fanconi anemia therapeutics in 
an optimized and cost-effective platform.

DOI: 10.1186/s13023-020-01437-1 
PMCID: PMC7325660
PMID: 32605631 

