
1. BMC Pediatr. 2020 Jun 29;20(1):320. doi: 10.1186/s12887-020-02200-y.

Genotype-phenotype correlation in two Polish neonates with alveolar capillary
dysplasia.

Kozłowska Z(1), Owsiańska Z(2), Wroblewska JP(3), Kałużna A(3), Marszałek A(3),
Singh Y(4), Mroziński B(5), Liu Q(6), Karolak JA(7), Stankiewicz P(6), Deutsch
G(8), Szymankiewicz-Bręborowicz M(2), Szczapa T(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neonatology, Neonatal Biophysical Monitoring and Cardiopulmonary
Therapies Research Unit, Poznan University of Medical Sciences, Poznan, Poland.
zuzanna.kozlowska@yahoo.pl.
(2)Department of Neonatology, Neonatal Biophysical Monitoring and Cardiopulmonary
Therapies Research Unit, Poznan University of Medical Sciences, Poznan, Poland.
(3)Department of Pathology, Poznan University of Medical Sciences and Greater
Poland Cancer Center, Poznan, Poland.
(4)Department of Neonatology and Paediatric Cardiology, Cambridge University
Hospitals NHS Foundation Trust, Cambridge, UK.
(5)Department of Pediatric Cardiology and Nephrology, Poznan University of
Medical Sciences, Poznan, Poland.
(6)Department of Molecular and Human Genetics, Baylor College of Medicine,
Houston, TX, USA.
(7)Chair and Department of Genetics and Pharmaceutical Microbiology, Poznan
University of Medical Sciences, Poznan, Poland.
(8)Department of Pathology, Seattle Children's Hospital, Seattle, USA.

BACKGROUND: Alveolar capillary dysplasia (ACD) is a rare cause of severe
pulmonary hypertension and respiratory failure in neonates. The onset of ACD is
usually preceded by a short asymptomatic period. The condition is refractory to
all available therapies as it irreversibly affects development of the capillary
bed in the lungs. The diagnosis of ACD is based on histopathological evaluation
of lung biopsy or autopsy tissue or genetic testing of FOXF1 on chromosome
16q24.1. Here, we describe the first two Polish patients with ACD confirmed by
histopathological and genetic examination.
CASE PRESENTATION: The patients were term neonates with high Apgar scores in the 
first minutes of life. They both were diagnosed prenatally with heart defects.
Additionally, the first patient presented with omphalocele. The neonate slightly 
deteriorated around 12th hour of life, but underwent surgical repair of
omphalocele followed by mechanical ventilation. Due to further deterioration,
therapy included inhaled nitric oxide (iNO), inotropes and surfactant
administration. The second patient was treated with prostaglandin E1 since birth 
due to suspicion of aortic coarctation (CoA). After ruling out CoA in the 3rd day
of life, infusion of prostaglandin E1 was discountinued and immediately patient's
condition worsened. Subsequent treatment included re-administration of
prostaglandin E1, iNO and mechanical ventilation. Both patients presented with
transient improvement after application of iNO, but died despite maximized
therapy. They were histopathologically diagnosed post-mortem with ACD. Array
comparative genomic hybridization in patient one and patient two revealed
copy-number variant (CNV) deletions, respectively, ~ 1.45 Mb in size involving
FOXF1 and an ~ 0.7 Mb in size involving FOXF1 enhancer and leaving FOXF1 intact.
CONCLUSIONS: Both patients presented with a distinct course of ACD,
extra-pulmonary manifestations and response to medications. Surgery and ceasing
of prostaglandin E1 infusion should be considered as potential causes of this
variability. We further highlight the necessity of thorough genetic testing and
histopathological examination and propose immunostaining for CD31 and CD34 to
facilitate the diagnostic process for better management of infants with ACD.

DOI: 10.1186/s12887-020-02200-y 
PMCID: PMC7322906
PMID: 32600276 

