
1. Food Funct. 2020 Jul 22;11(7):6422-6432. doi: 10.1039/c9fo01901d.

Curcumin-enhanced antitumor effects of sorafenib via regulating the metabolism
and tumor microenvironment.

Man S (1), Yao J , Lv P , Liu Y , Yang L , Ma L .

Author information: 
(1)State Key Laboratory of Food Nutrition and Safety, Key Laboratory of
Industrial Microbiology, Ministry of Education, Tianjin Key Laboratory of
Industry Microbiology, National and Local United Engineering Lab of Metabolic
Control Fermentation Technology, China International Science and Technology
Cooperation Base of Food Nutrition/Safety and Medicinal Chemistry, College of
Biotechnology, Tianjin University of Science & Technology, Tianjin, 300457,
China. malong@tust.edu.cn.

Curcumin, the main active ingredient of turmeric, is widely used as a kind of
food additive and also displays a range of pharmacological activities, such as
anti-inflammation, anti-tumor, liver and kidney protection, and so forth.
Sorafenib was the first targeted agent against hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC),
whose intolerance is related to the promotion of lipid synthesis and
epithelial-to-mesenchymal transition (EMT) formation. In this study, biochemical 
analysis, immune cells composition, the tumor microenvironment, metabolomics, and
relative metabolic enzymes and transporters were detected in H22-bearing mice
treated with curcumin combined with sorafenib vs. control groups. It was found
that curcumin protected against liver cancer progression through reducing the
level of alpha fetoprotein in liver tissues, increasing the number of immune
cells, like NK cells, inhibiting EMT via the regulation of IL-6/JAK/STAT3 and
IL-1β/NF-κB pathways, suppressing anaerobic glycolysis through the inhibition of 
LDH and HIF-1α, and decreasing the lipid synthesis via the downregulation of
FASN, and upregulated the serum HDL-C and mRNA levels of apoA1 in the
sorafenib-treated mice. Furthermore, curcumin regulation of the disorder of
glycolipid metabolism and EMT was also based on the PI3K/AKT pathway. A docking
study was performed and proved the strong affinity between curcumin and the
proteins of STAT3, FASN, and AKT. All in all, this experiment provided evidence
for the addition of curcumin in the diet to enhance the antitumor efficacy of
sorafenib through activating immune function, downregulating EMT, and reversing
disorders of the metabolism.

DOI: 10.1039/c9fo01901d 
PMID: 32613952  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

