
1. Am J Trop Med Hyg. 2020 Aug;103(2_Suppl):90-97. doi: 10.4269/ajtmh.19-0664.

Pyrethroid and Carbamate Resistance in Anopheles funestus Giles along Lake Kariba
in Southern Zambia.

Chanda J(1), Saili K(1), Phiri F(2), Stevenson JC(3)(4), Mwenda M(1), Chishimba
S(1), Mulube C(1), Mambwe B(1), Lungu C(1), Earle D(1), Bennett A(5), Eisele
TP(6), Kamuliwo M(2), Steketee RW(7), Keating J(6), Miller JM(1), Sikaala
CH(8)(2).

Author information: 
(1)PATH Malaria Control and Elimination Partnership in Africa (MACEPA), Lusaka,
Zambia.
(2)National Malaria Elimination Centre, Zambia Ministry of Health, Lusaka,
Zambia.
(3)W. Harry Feinstone Department of Molecular Microbiology and Immunology, Johns 
Hopkins Bloomberg School of Public Health, Baltimore, Maryland.
(4)Macha Research Trust, Choma, Zambia.
(5)Malaria Elimination Initiative, Global Health Group, University of California 
San Francisco, San Francisco, California.
(6)Department of Tropical Medicine, Center for Applied Malaria Research and
Evaluation, Tulane University School of Public Health and Tropical Medicine, New 
Orleans, Louisiana.
(7)PATH MACEPA, Seattle, Washington.
(8)SADC Malaria Elimination Eight Secretariat, Windhoek, Namibia.

Whereas data on insecticide resistance and its underlying mechanisms exist for
parts of Zambia, data remain limited in the southern part of the country. This
study investigated the status of insecticide resistance, metabolic mechanisms,
and parasite infection in Anopheles funestus along Lake Kariba in southern
Zambia. Indoor-resting mosquitoes were collected from 20 randomly selected houses
within clusters where a mass drug administration trial was conducted and raised
to F1 progeny. Non-blood-fed 2- to 5-day-old female An. funestus were exposed to 
WHO insecticide-impregnated papers with 0.05% deltamethrin, 0.1% bendiocarb,
0.25% pirimiphos-methyl, or 4% dichloro-diphenyl-trichloroethane (DDT). In
separate assays, An. funestus were pre-exposed to piperonyl butoxide (PBO) to
determine the presence of monooxygenases. Wild-caught An. funestus that had laid 
eggs for susceptibility assays were screened for circumsporozoite protein of
Plasmodium falciparum by ELISA, and sibling species were identified by polymerase
chain reaction. Anopheles funestus showed resistance to deltamethrin and
bendiocarb but remained susceptible to pirimiphos-methyl and DDT. The
pre-exposure of An. funestus to PBO restored full susceptibility to deltamethrin 
but not to bendiocarb. The overall sporozoite infection rate in An. funestus
populations was 5.8%. Detection of pyrethroid and carbamate resistance in An.
funestus calls for increased insecticide resistance monitoring to guide planning 
and selection of effective insecticide resistance management strategies. To
prevent the development of resistance and reduce the underlying vectorial
capacity of mosquitoes in areas targeted for malaria elimination, an effective
integrated vector management strategy is needed.

DOI: 10.4269/ajtmh.19-0664 
PMCID: PMC7416976
PMID: 32618244  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

