
1. J Biochem Mol Toxicol. 2020 Jul 6:e22543. doi: 10.1002/jbt.22543. [Epub ahead of 
print]

Nimbolide prevents myocardial damage by regulating cardiac biomarkers,
antioxidant level, and apoptosis signaling against doxorubicin-induced
cardiotoxicity in rats.

Li H(1), Xia B(2), Chen W(1), Zhang Y(1), Gao X(3), Chinnathambi A(4), Alharbi
SA(4), Zhao Y(5).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Critical Care Medicine, Shenyang Tenth People's Hospital,
Shenyang, Liaoning, China.
(2)Internal Medicine-Cardiovascular Department, The Second Affiliated Hospital of
GuiZhou Medical University, Kaili, GuiZhou, China.
(3)Ultrasonic Room, Shenyang Tenth People's Hospital, Shenyang, Liaoning, China.
(4)Department of Botany and Microbiology, College of Science, King Saud
University, Riyadh, Saudi Arabia.
(5)ICU, Affiliated Hospital of Weifang Medical University, Weifang, Shandong,
China.

The current work planned to assess the protecting properties of nimbolide against
doxorubicin (DOX)-treated myocardial damage. Myocardial damage was produced
with 2.5 mg/kg of DOX given on alternative days (14 days). Thiobarbituric acid
reactive substances (TBARS) levels of a lipid peroxidative marker were elevated, 
whereas reduced body weight, heart weight, blood pressure indices and reduced
levels of antioxidants like glutathione-S-transferase, superoxide dismutase,
catalase, glutathione peroxidase, glutathione, and glutathione reductase were
observed in the heart tissue of DOX-treated animals. DOX-treated
animals showed augmented levels of cardiac markers likes monocyte chemotactic
protein-1, interferon-gamma, aspartate transferase, creatine kinase, lactate
dehydrogenase, creatine kinase-muscle/brain, heart-type fatty acid-binding
protein, glycogen phosphorylase isoenzyme BB, transforming growth factor-β, brain
natriuretic peptide, myoglobin, and cTnI in serum. Histopathological assessment
confirmed the DOX-induced cardiotoxicity. Furthermore, DOX-induced rats showed
augmented inflammatory mediators (nuclear factor-κB [NF-kB], tumor necrosis
factor-α [TNF-α], and interleukin-1β [IL-1β]) and increased PI3K/Akt signaling
proteins (PI3K, p-Bad/Bad, caspase-3, and p-Akt), whereas decreased oxidative
markers (HO-1 and NQO-1) and p-PTEN were observed. Nimbolide-supplemented rats
showed reduced activity/levels of cardiac markers and TBARS levels in serum and
heart tissue. Levels of enzymatic and nonenzymatic antioxidants were augmented in
the heart tissue of nimbolide-supplemented rats. Nimbolide influence decreased
apoptosis, inflammation, and enhanced antioxidant markers through the modulation 
of p-Bad/Bad, caspase-3, PI3K, p-Akt, TNF-α, NF-kB, IL-1β, HO-1, NQO-1, and
p-PTEN markers. The histopathological explanations were observed to be in line
with biochemical analysis. Therefore, the finding of current work was that
nimbolide has a defensive effect on the myocardium against DOX-induced cardiac
tissue damage.

© 2020 Wiley Periodicals LLC.

DOI: 10.1002/jbt.22543 
PMID: 32627270 

