
1. PLoS Pathog. 2020 Jul 13;16(7):e1008220. doi: 10.1371/journal.ppat.1008220.
eCollection 2020 Jul.

A trafficome-wide RNAi screen reveals deployment of early and late secretory host
proteins and the entire late endo-/lysosomal vesicle fusion machinery by
intracellular Salmonella.

Kehl A(1)(2), Göser V(1), Reuter T(1), Liss V(1), Franke M(1), John C(1), Richter
CP(2), Deiwick J(1), Hensel M(1)(3).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Microbiology, University of Osnabrück, Osnabrück, Germany.
(2)Division of Biophysics, University of Osnabrück, Osnabrück, Germany.
(3)CellNanOs-Center for Cellular Nanoanalytics, Fachbereich Biologie/Chemie,
Universität Osnabrück, Osnabrück, Germany.

The intracellular lifestyle of Salmonella enterica is characterized by the
formation of a replication-permissive membrane-bound niche, the
Salmonella-containing vacuole (SCV). As a further consequence of the massive
remodeling of the host cell endosomal system, intracellular Salmonella establish 
a unique network of various Salmonella-induced tubules (SIT). The bacterial
repertoire of effector proteins required for the establishment for one type of
these SIT, the Salmonella-induced filaments (SIF), is rather well-defined.
However, the corresponding host cell proteins are still poorly understood. To
identify host factors required for the formation of SIF, we performed a
sub-genomic RNAi screen. The analyses comprised high-resolution live cell imaging
to score effects on SIF induction, dynamics and morphology. The hits of our
functional RNAi screen comprise: i) The late endo-/lysosomal SNARE (soluble
N-ethylmaleimide-sensitive factor attachment protein receptor) complex,
consisting of STX7, STX8, VTI1B, and VAMP7 or VAMP8, which is, in conjunction
with RAB7 and the homotypic fusion and protein sorting (HOPS) tethering complex, 
a complete vesicle fusion machinery. ii) Novel interactions with the early
secretory GTPases RAB1A and RAB1B, providing a potential link to coat protein
complex I (COPI) vesicles and reinforcing recently identified ties to the
endoplasmic reticulum. iii) New connections to the late secretory pathway and/or 
the recycling endosome via the GTPases RAB3A, RAB8A, and RAB8B and the SNAREs
VAMP2, VAMP3, and VAMP4. iv) An unprecedented involvement of clathrin-coated
structures. The resulting set of hits allowed us to characterize completely new
host factor interactions, and to strengthen observations from several previous
studies.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.ppat.1008220 
PMCID: PMC7377517
PMID: 32658937  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: No authors have competing interests

