
1. Curr Microbiol. 2020 Sep;77(9):2128-2136. doi: 10.1007/s00284-020-02091-3. Epub
2020 Jul 13.

Growth Inhibition of Common Enteric Pathogens in the Intestine of Broilers by
Microbially Produced Dextran and Levan Exopolysaccharides.

Ashfaq I(1), Amjad H(1), Ahmad W(1)(2), Nasir A(1), Ali A(3), Ali WR(4), Khaliq
S(1), Hayat A(2), Ali H(1), Sattar F(1), Ghauri MA(1), Anwar MA(5).

Author information: 
(1)Industrial Biotechnology Division, National Institute for Biotechnology and
Genetic Engineering, Constituent College of Pakistan Institute of Engineering and
Applied Sciences, Faisalabad, Pakistan.
(2)Department of Microbiology, Abbottabad University of Science and Technology,
Havelian, Abbottabad, Pakistan.
(3)Health Biotechnology Division, National Institute for Biotechnology and
Genetic Engineering, Constituent College of Pakistan Institute of Engineering and
Applied Sciences, Faisalabad, Pakistan.
(4)Soil and Environmental Biotechnology Division, National Institute for
Biotechnology and Genetic Engineering, Constituent College of Pakistan Institute 
of Engineering and Applied Sciences, Faisalabad, Pakistan.
(5)Industrial Biotechnology Division, National Institute for Biotechnology and
Genetic Engineering, Constituent College of Pakistan Institute of Engineering and
Applied Sciences, Faisalabad, Pakistan. munir1@nibge.org.

Antibiotics are generally applied for treatment or as subtherapeutic agents to
overcome diseases caused by pathogenic bacteria including Escherichia coli,
Salmonella and Enterococcus species in poultry. However, due to their possible
adverse effects on animal health and to maintain food safety, probiotics,
prebiotics, and synbiotics have been proposed as alternatives to antibiotic
growth promoters (AGPs) in poultry production. In this study, the effects of
prebiotics on the augmentation of broiler's indigenous gut microbiology were
studied. Day old 180 broilers chicks were divided into four treatment groups: G, 
L, C1, and C2. The groups G and L were fed with basal diet containing 3% dextran 
and 3% levan, respectively. Control groups were fed with basal diets without
antibiotic (C1) and with antibiotics (C2). The experimental groups showed
decreased mortality as compared to control groups. After 35 days, the chickens
were euthanized and intestinal fluid was analyzed for enteric pathogens on
chromogenic agar plates and by 16S rRNA gene sequencing. Inhibition of the growth
of E. coli and Enterococcus was observed in groups G and L, respectively, whereas
Salmonella was only present in group C1. Also, high populations of lactic acid
bacteria were detected in the intestine of prebiotic fed birds as compared to
controls. These results depict that dextran and levan have the potential to
replace the use of antibiotics in poultry feed for inhibiting the growth of
common enteric pathogens. To the best of our knowledge, this is the first study
where effects of dextran and levan on intestinal microbiota of broilers have been
reported.

DOI: 10.1007/s00284-020-02091-3 
PMID: 32661680 

