
1. J Cell Mol Med. 2020 Sep;24(17):10233-10244. doi: 10.1111/jcmm.15639. Epub 2020
Jul 17.

Obesity and triple-negative-breast-cancer: Is apelin a new key target?

Gourgue F(1)(2), Mignion L(2), Van Hul M(1), Dehaen N(2), Bastien E(3), Payen
V(4), Leroy B(5), Joudiou N(6), Vertommen D(7), Bouzin C(8), Delzenne N(1),
Gallez B(2), Feron O(3), Jordan BF(2), Cani PD(1).

Author information: 
(1)Metabolism & Nutrition Research Group, Louvain Drug Research Institute, WELBIO
(Walloon Excellence in Life sciences and BIOtechnology), UCLouvain, Université
catholique de Louvain, Brussels, Belgium.
(2)Biomedical Magnetic Resonance Research Group, UCLouvain, Louvain Drug Research
Institute, Université catholique de Louvain, Brussels, Belgium.
(3)Pole of Pharmacology and Therapeutics, Institut de Recherche Expérimentale et 
Clinique, UCLouvain, Université catholique de Louvain, Brussels, Belgium.
(4)Pole of Pediatrics, Institut de Recherche Expérimentale et Clinique,
UCLouvain, Université catholique de Louvain, Brussels, Belgium.
(5)Laboratory of Proteomics and Microbiology, MS-Quanta Platform, Research
Institute for Biosciences, University of Mons, Mons, Belgium.
(6)Nuclear and Electron Spin Technologies (NEST) Platform, Louvain Drug Research 
Institute (LDRI), UCLouvain, Université catholique de Louvain, Brussels, Belgium.
(7)de Duve Institute (DDUV), Université catholique de Louvain (UCLouvain),
Brussels, Belgium.
(8)Imaging platform 2IP, Institut de Recherche Expérimentale et Clinique (IREC), 
UCLouvain, Université catholique de Louvain, Brussels, Belgium.

Epidemiological studies have shown that obese subjects have an increased risk of 
developing triple-negative breast cancer (TNBC) and an overall reduced survival. 
However, the relation between obesity and TNBC remains difficult to understand.
We hypothesize that apelin, an adipokine whose levels are increased in obesity,
could be a major factor contributing to both tumour growth and metastatization in
TNBC obese patients. We observed that development of obesity under high-fat diet 
in TNBC tumour-bearing mice significantly increased tumour growth. By showing no 
effect of high-fat diet in obesity-resistant mice, we demonstrated the necessity 
to develop obesity-related disorders to increase tumour growth. Apelin mRNA
expression was also increased in the subcutaneous adipose tissue and tumours of
obese mice. We further highlighted that the reproduction of obesity-related
levels of apelin in lean mice led to an increased TNBC growth and brain
metastases formation. Finally, injections of the apelinergic antagonist F13A to
obese mice significantly reduced TNBC growth, suggesting that apelinergic system 
interference could be an interesting therapeutic strategy in the context of
obesity and TNBC.

© 2020 The Authors. Journal of Cellular and Molecular Medicine published by
Foundation for Cellular and Molecular Medicine and John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/jcmm.15639 
PMCID: PMC7520321
PMID: 32681609 

