
1. DNA Repair (Amst). 2020 Oct;94:102936. doi: 10.1016/j.dnarep.2020.102936. Epub
2020 Jul 16.

Novel TALEN-generated mCitrine-FANCD2 fusion reporter mouse model for in vivo
research of DNA damage response.

Sabol M(1), Akbudak MA(2), Fricova D(3), Beck I(4), Sedlacek R(4).

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Transgenic Models of Diseases, Institute of Molecular Genetics
of the CAS, Prague, Czech Republic; Laboratory for Hereditary Cancer, Division of
Molecular Medicine, Rudjer Boskovic Institute, Zagreb, Croatia.
(2)Laboratory of Transgenic Models of Diseases, Institute of Molecular Genetics
of the CAS, Prague, Czech Republic; Department of Agricultural Biotechnology,
Akdeniz University, Antalya, Turkey. Electronic address: akbudak@akdeniz.edu.tr.
(3)Laboratory of Transgenic Models of Diseases, Institute of Molecular Genetics
of the CAS, Prague, Czech Republic; Institute of Neuroimmunology, Slovak Academy 
of Sciences, Bratislava, Slovakia.
(4)Laboratory of Transgenic Models of Diseases, Institute of Molecular Genetics
of the CAS, Prague, Czech Republic.

Reporter gene mouse lines are routinely used for studies related to functional
genomics, proteomics, cell biology or cell-based drug screenings, and represent a
crucial platform for in vivo research. In the generation of knock-in reporter
lines, new gene targeting methods provide several advantages over the standard
transgenic techniques. First of all, specific targeting of the genome allows
expression of the reporter gene under controlled conditions, whether in a
specific locus in the genome or in a "safe harbor" locus. Historically, the
ROSA26 locus is used for gene knock-in strategies by homologous recombination in 
mouse embryonic stem cells. The other preferred place for integration of the
reporter transgene in the mouse genome is the endogenous promoter of a target
gene. In this study, we employed TALENs to generate a reporter fusion protein
expressed from its native promoter. For monitoring DNA damage response, we
generated a mouse line expressing a mCitrine-tagged version of the FANCD2
protein, involved in DNA damage response and repair, and the Fanconi anemia (FA) 
pathway. This model could be a valuable tool for in vivo investigation of DNA
damage.

Copyright © 2020 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.dnarep.2020.102936 
PMID: 32717583  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

