
1. J Genet Eng Biotechnol. 2020 Jul 28;18(1):33. doi: 10.1186/s43141-020-00048-4.

Prioritization of Mur family drug targets against A. baumannii and identification
of their homologous proteins through molecular phylogeny, primary sequence, and
structural analysis.

Amera GM(1), Khan RJ(1), Jha RK(1), Pathak A(2), Muthukumaran J(1), Singh AK(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biotechnology, School of Engineering and Technology, Sharda
University, Greater Noida, UP, 201310, India.
(2)Department of Chemistry, Indian Institute of Technology, Hauz Khas, New Delhi,
110016, India.
(3)Department of Biotechnology, School of Engineering and Technology, Sharda
University, Greater Noida, UP, 201310, India. amitk.singh@sharda.ac.in.

BACKGROUND: The World Health Organization (WHO) report stated that Acinetobacter 
baumannii had been classified as one of the most important pathogenic bacteria
causing nosocomial infection in hospital patients due to multi-drug resistance
(MDR). It is vital to find out new bacterial drug targets and annotated their
structure and function for the exploration of new anti-bacterial agents. The
present study utilized a systematic route to prioritize the potential drug
targets that belong to Mur family of Acinetobacter baumannii and identify their
homologous proteins using a computational approach such as sequence similarity
search, multiple sequence alignment, phylogenetic analysis, protein sequence, and
protein structure analysis.
RESULTS: From the results of protein sequence analysis of eight Mur family
proteins, they divided into three main enzymatic classes namely transferases
(MurG, MurA and MraY), ligases (MurC, MurD, MurE, and MurF), and oxidoreductase
(MurB). Based on the results of intra-comparative protein sequence analysis and
enzymatic classification, we have chosen MurB, MurE, and MurG as the prioritized 
drug targets from A. baumannii and subjected them for further detailed studies of
inter-species comparison. This inter-species comparison help us to explore the
sequential and structural properties of homologous proteins in other species and 
hence, opens a gateway for new target identification and using common inhibitor
for different bacterial species caused by various diseases. The pairwise sequence
alignment results between A. baumannii's MurB with A. calcoaceticus's MurB, A.
baumannii's MurE with A. seifertii's MurE, and A. baumannii's MurG with A.
pittii's MurG showed that every group of the proteins are highly similar with
each other and they showed sequence identity of 95.7% and sequence similarity of 
97.2%.
CONCLUSION: Together with the results of secondary and three-dimensional
structure predictions explained that three selected proteins (MurB, MurE, and
MurG) from A. baumannii and their related proteins (AcMurB, AsMurE, and ApMurG)
belong to mixed αβ class and they are very similar.

DOI: 10.1186/s43141-020-00048-4 
PMCID: PMC7387395
PMID: 32725318 

