
1. J Am Soc Nephrol. 2020 Oct;31(10):2372-2391. doi: 10.1681/ASN.2019121261. Epub
2020 Jul 31.

LIM-Nebulette Reinforces Podocyte Structural Integrity by Linking Actin and
Vimentin Filaments.

Ge X(1), Zhang T(1), Yu X(1), Muwonge AN(1), Anandakrishnan N(1), Wong NJ(1),
Haydak JC(1), Reid JM(1), Fu J(1), Wong JS(1), Bhattacharya S(1)(2), Cuttitta
CM(1), Zhong F(1), Gordon RE(3), Salem F(3), Janssen W(4), Hone JC(2), Zhang
A(5), Li H(6), He JC(1)(7), Gusella GL(1), Campbell KN(1), Azeloglu EU(8)(7).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Nephrology, Department of Medicine, Icahn School of Medicine at
Mount Sinai, New York, New York.
(2)Department of Mechanical Engineering, Columbia University, New York, New York.
(3)Department of Pathology, Icahn School of Medicine at Mount Sinai, New York,
New York.
(4)Department of Neuroscience, Icahn School of Medicine at Mount Sinai, New York,
New York.
(5)Department of Nephrology, Children's Hospital of Nanjing Medical University,
Nanjing, China.
(6)Department of Microbiology, Biochemistry and Molecular Genetics, Rutgers
University-New Jersey Medical School, Newark, New Jersey.
(7)Department of Pharmacological Sciences, Icahn School of Medicine at Mount
Sinai, New York, New York.
(8)Division of Nephrology, Department of Medicine, Icahn School of Medicine at
Mount Sinai, New York, New York evren.azeloglu@mssm.edu.

BACKGROUND: Maintenance of the intricate interdigitating morphology of podocytes 
is crucial for glomerular filtration. One of the key aspects of specialized
podocyte morphology is the segregation and organization of distinct cytoskeletal 
filaments into different subcellular components, for which the exact mechanisms
remain poorly understood.
METHODS: Cells from rats, mice, and humans were used to describe the cytoskeletal
configuration underlying podocyte structure. Screening the time-dependent
proteomic changes in the rat puromycin aminonucleoside-induced nephropathy model 
correlated the actin-binding protein LIM-nebulette strongly with glomerular
function. Single-cell RNA sequencing and immunogold labeling were used to
determine Nebl expression specificity in podocytes. Automated high-content
imaging, super-resolution microscopy, atomic force microscopy (AFM), live-cell
imaging of calcium, and measurement of motility and adhesion dynamics
characterized the physiologic role of LIM-nebulette in podocytes.
RESULTS: Nebl knockout mice have increased susceptibility to adriamycin-induced
nephropathy and display morphologic, cytoskeletal, and focal adhesion
abnormalities with altered calcium dynamics, motility, and Rho GTPase activity.
LIM-nebulette expression is decreased in diabetic nephropathy and FSGS patients
at both the transcript and protein level. In mice, rats, and humans,
LIM-nebulette expression is localized to primary, secondary, and tertiary
processes of podocytes, where it colocalizes with focal adhesions as well as with
vimentin fibers. LIM-nebulette shRNA knockdown in immortalized human podocytes
leads to dysregulation of vimentin filament organization and reduced cellular
elasticity as measured by AFM indentation.
CONCLUSIONS: LIM-nebulette is a multifunctional cytoskeletal protein that is
critical in the maintenance of podocyte structural integrity through active
reorganization of focal adhesions, the actin cytoskeleton, and intermediate
filaments.

Copyright © 2020 by the American Society of Nephrology.

DOI: 10.1681/ASN.2019121261 
PMCID: PMC7609000 [Available on 2021-10-01]
PMID: 32737144  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

