
1. Biomed Pharmacother. 2020 Oct;130:110472. doi: 10.1016/j.biopha.2020.110472. Epub
2020 Jul 29.

Omeprazole, an inhibitor of proton pump, suppresses De novo lipogenesis in
gastric epithelial cells.

Chen P(1), Li L(2), Wang H(3), Zhao J(3), Cheng Y(3), Xie J(3), Cao M(3), Huang
L(3), Yang F(3), Chen H(3), Chen J(4), Su M(5), Xu Y(6), Zheng F(7), Geng L(8),
Xu W(9), Gong S(10).

Author information: 
(1)The First Affiliated Hospital of Jinan University, Jinan University,
Guangzhou, China; Department of Gastroenterology, Guangzhou Women and Children's 
Medical Center, Guangzhou Medical University, Guangzhou, China.
(2)Department of Pharmacy, Zhuhai Center for Maternal and Child Health Care,
Zhuhai, China.
(3)Department of Gastroenterology, Guangzhou Women and Children's Medical Center,
Guangzhou Medical University, Guangzhou, China.
(4)Department of Neonatal Intensive Care Unit, Guangzhou Women and Children's
Medical Center, Guangzhou Medical University, Guangzhou, China.
(5)Department of Cancer Biology and Therapeutics, School of Pharmacy and
Pharmaceutical Sciences, Cardiff University, Wales, CF103AT, UK.
(6)Department of Preventive Medicine, School of Public Health, Fujian Medical
University, Fuzhou, China.
(7)Department of Infectious Diseases, The Affiliated Hospital of Putian
University, Putian, China.
(8)Department of Gastroenterology, Guangzhou Women and Children's Medical Center,
Guangzhou Medical University, Guangzhou, China; Guangzhou Women and Children's
Medical Center, Guangzhou Institute of Pediatrics, Guangzhou Medical University, 
Guangzhou, China.
(9)Department of Gastroenterology, Guangzhou Women and Children's Medical Center,
Guangzhou Medical University, Guangzhou, China; Guangzhou Women and Children's
Medical Center, Guangzhou Institute of Pediatrics, Guangzhou Medical University, 
Guangzhou, China. Electronic address: xushi123@gmail.com.
(10)The First Affiliated Hospital of Jinan University, Jinan University,
Guangzhou, China; Department of Gastroenterology, Guangzhou Women and Children's 
Medical Center, Guangzhou Medical University, Guangzhou, China; Guangzhou Women
and Children's Medical Center, Guangzhou Institute of Pediatrics, Guangzhou
Medical University, Guangzhou, China. Electronic address: gongsitang@hotmail.com.

BACKGROUND: De novo lipogenesis (DNL) has been reported to involve in a serial
types of disease. A standard triple therapy, including a PPI, omeprazole, and
antibiotics (clarithromycin and amoxicillin), is widely used as the first-line
regimen for helicobacter pylori (H. pylori)-infectious treatment. The objective
of this study is to explore the function of a standard triple therapy on DNL.
METHODS AND RESULTS: We collected the clinical sample from the patients diagnosed
with or without H. pylori infection. Oil red staining, real-time PCR, western
blotting (WB) and adipored experiment were performed to detect the effect of a
standard triple therapy on DNL. The expression of relative key enzymes was
assessed in gastric mucosa of clinical sample by IHC. Both 54 cases with H.
pylori-negative and 37 cases with H. pylori-positive were enrolled in this study,
and IHC assay showed that both fatty acid synthase (FASN) and ATP-citrate lyase
(ACLY) expression, the critical enzymes involved in DNL, were increased in
gastric mucosa of patients with H. pylori-positive compared with that with H.
pylori-negative. Real-time PCR and WB analysis showed that neither clarithromycin
nor amoxicillin inhibited FASN and ACLY expression, while treatment of BGC823
cells with omeprazole with 200 μM or 300 μM significantly abolished FASN and ACLY
expression, leading to reduce lipid content.
CONCLUSION: These findings suggested that omeprazole suppressed DNL in gastric
cells, implying that targeting DNL is an alternative strategy in improving the
treatment of patients with H. pylori infection.

Copyright © 2020 The Author(s). Published by Elsevier Masson SAS.. All rights
reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.biopha.2020.110472 
PMID: 32738635  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

