
1. J Am Soc Nephrol. 2020 Oct;31(10):2292-2311. doi: 10.1681/ASN.2019111160. Epub
2020 Aug 7.

Multifunctional Natural Polymer Nanoparticles as Antifibrotic Gene Carriers for
CKD Therapy.

Midgley AC(1)(2), Wei Y(3), Zhu D(3), Gao F(3)(2), Yan H(3), Khalique A(3)(2),
Luo W(3)(2), Jiang H(3), Liu X(3)(4), Guo J(5), Zhang C(6), Feng G(7), Wang K(3),
Bai X(8)(9), Ning W(5), Yang C(4), Zhao Q(3), Kong D(1)(2)(6).

Author information: 
(1)Key Laboratory of Bioactive Materials, Ministry of Education, College of Life 
Sciences, Nankai University, Tianjin, China midgleyac@nankai.edu.cn
kongdeling@nankai.edu.cn.
(2)Rongxiang Xu Center for Regenerative Life Science, State Key Laboratory of
Medicinal Chemical Biology, College of Life Sciences, Nankai University, Tianjin,
China.
(3)Key Laboratory of Bioactive Materials, Ministry of Education, College of Life 
Sciences, Nankai University, Tianjin, China.
(4)Key Laboratory of Molecular Microbiology and Technology, Ministry of
Education, College of Life Sciences, Nankai University, Tianjin, China.
(5)Department of Genetics and Cellular Biology, College of Life Sciences, Nankai 
University, Tianjin, China.
(6)Tianjin Key Laboratory of Biomaterial Research, Institute of Biomedical
Engineering, Chinese Academy of Medical Sciences and Peking Union Medical
College, Tianjin, China.
(7)Department of Genitourinary Oncology, Tianjin Medical University Cancer
Institute and Hospital, National Clinical Research Center for Cancer, Tianjin Key
Laboratory of Cancer Prevention and Therapy, Tianjin's Clinical Research Center
for Cancer, Tianjin, China.
(8)Department of Nephrology, Chinese PLA General Hospital, Chinese PLA Institute 
of Nephrology, Beijing, China.
(9)State Key Laboratory of Kidney Diseases, National Clinical Research Center for
Kidney Diseases, Beijing, China.

BACKGROUND: Progressive fibrosis is the underlying pathophysiological process of 
CKD, and targeted prevention or reversal of the profibrotic cell phenotype is an 
important goal in developing therapeutics for CKD. Nanoparticles offer new ways
to deliver antifibrotic therapies to damaged tissues and resident cells to limit 
manifestation of the profibrotic phenotype.
METHODS: We focused on delivering plasmid DNA expressing bone morphogenetic
protein 7 (BMP7) or hepatocyte growth factor (HGF)-NK1 (HGF/NK1) by encapsulation
within chitosan nanoparticles coated with hyaluronan, to safely administer
multifunctional nanoparticles containing the plasmid DNA to the kidneys for
localized and sustained expression of antifibrotic factors. We characterized and 
evaluated nanoparticles in vitro for biocompatibility and antifibrotic function. 
To assess antifibrotic activity in vivo, we used noninvasive delivery to
unilateral ureteral obstruction mouse models of CKD.
RESULTS: Synthesis of hyaluronan-coated chitosan nanoparticles containing plasmid
DNA expressing either BMP7 or NGF/NKI resulted in consistently sized
nanoparticles, which-following endocytosis driven by CD44+ cells-promoted
cellular growth and inhibited fibrotic gene expression in vitro. Intravenous tail
injection of these nanoparticles resulted in approximately 40%-45% of gene uptake
in kidneys in vivo. The nanoparticles attenuated the development of fibrosis and 
rescued renal function in unilateral ureteral obstruction mouse models of CKD.
Gene delivery of BMP7 reversed the progression of fibrosis and regenerated
tubules, whereas delivery of HGF/NK1 halted CKD progression by eliminating
collagen fiber deposition.
CONCLUSIONS: Nanoparticle delivery of HGF/NK1 conveyed potent antifibrotic and
proregenerative effects. Overall, this research provided the proof of concept on 
which to base future investigations for enhanced targeting and transfection of
therapeutic genes to kidney tissues, and an avenue toward treatment of CKD.

Copyright © 2020 by the American Society of Nephrology.

DOI: 10.1681/ASN.2019111160 
PMCID: PMC7609017 [Available on 2021-10-01]
PMID: 32769144  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

