
1. Tissue Eng Part A. 2020 Dec;26(23-24):1312-1331. doi: 10.1089/ten.TEA.2020.0172. 
Epub 2020 Sep 25.

Electrospun ZnO/Poly(Vinylidene Fluoride-Trifluoroethylene) Scaffolds for Lung
Tissue Engineering.

Azimi B(1)(2)(3), Sorayani Bafqi MS(4), Fusco A(5), Ricci C(1)(2), Gallone G(1), 
Bagherzadeh R(6), Donnarumma G(5), Uddin MJ(7), Latifi M(4), Lazzeri A(1), Danti 
S(1)(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Civil and Industrial Engineering, University of Pisa, Pisa,
Italy.
(2)Department of Civil and Environmental Engineering, Massachusetts Institute of 
Technology (MIT), Cambridge, Massachusetts, USA.
(3)Interuniversity Consortium of Materials Science and Technology (INSTM),
Florence, Italy.
(4)Department of Textile Engineering, Amirkabir University of Technology, Tehran,
Iran.
(5)Department of Experimental Medicine, University of Campania "Luigi
Vanvitelli," Naples, Italy.
(6)Institute for Advanced Textile Materials and Technologies (ATMT), Amirkabir
University of Technology, Tehran, Iran.
(7)Department of Chemistry, Photonics and Energy Research Laboratory, University 
of Texas Rio Grande Valley, Edinburg, Texas, USA.

Due to the morbidity and lethality of pulmonary diseases, new biomaterials and
scaffolds are needed to support the regeneration of lung tissues, while ideally
providing protective effects against inflammation and microbial aggression. In
this study, we investigated the potential of nanocomposites of poly(vinylidene
fluoride-co-trifluoroethylene) [P(VDF-TrFE)] incorporating zinc oxide (ZnO), in
the form of electrospun fiber meshes for lung tissue engineering. We focused on
their anti-inflammatory, antimicrobial, and mechanoelectrical character according
to different fiber mesh textures (i.e., collected at 500 and 4000 rpm) and
compositions: (0/100) and (20/80) w/w% ZnO/P(VDF-TrFE), plain and composite,
respectively. The scaffolds were characterized in terms of morphological,
physicochemical, mechanical, and piezoelectric properties, as well as biological 
response of A549 alveolar epithelial cells in presence of lung-infecting
bacteria. By virtue of ZnO, the composite scaffolds showed a strong
anti-inflammatory response in A549 cells, as demonstrated by a significant
decrease of interleukin (IL) IL-1α, IL-6, and IL-8 expression in 6 h. In all the 
scaffold types, but remarkably in the aligned composite ones, transforming growth
factor β (TGF-β) and the antimicrobial peptide human β defensin-2 (HBD-2) were
significantly increased. The ZnO/P(VDF-TrFE) electrospun fiber meshes hindered
the biofilm formation by Staphylococcus aureus and Pseudomonas aeruginosa and the
cell/scaffold constructs were able to impede S. aureus adhesion and S. aureus and
P. aeruginosa invasiveness, independent of the scaffold type. The data obtained
suggested that the composite scaffolds showed potential for tunable mechanical
properties, in the range of alveolar walls and fibers. Finally, we also showed
good piezoelectricity, which is a feature found in elastic and collagen fibers,
the main extracellular matrix molecules in lungs. The combination of all these
properties makes ZnO/P(VDF-TrFE) fiber meshes promising for lung repair and
regeneration. Impact statement Airway tissue engineering is still a major
challenge and an optimally designed scaffold for this application should fulfill 
a number of key requirements. To help lung repair and regeneration, this study
proposes a nondegradable scaffold, with potential for tuning mechanical
properties. This scaffold possesses a strong anti-inflammatory character, and is 
able to hinder microbial infections, sustain epithelial cell growth, and provide 
physiological signals, like piezoelectricity. The development of such a device
could help the treatment of pulmonary deficiency, including the ones induced by
inflammatory phenomena, primary and secondary to pathogen infections.

DOI: 10.1089/ten.TEA.2020.0172 
PMID: 32842903 

