
1. Mol Cell Proteomics. 2020 Dec;19(12):1921-1936. doi: 10.1074/mcp.RA120.002283.
Epub 2020 Aug 31.

A Mouse Brain-based Multi-omics Integrative Approach Reveals Potential Blood
Biomarkers for Ischemic Stroke.

Simats A(1), Ramiro L(1), García-Berrocoso T(1), Briansó F(2), Gonzalo R(3),
Martín L(4), Sabé A(4), Gill N(1), Penalba A(1), Colomé N(4), Sánchez A(2),
Canals F(4), Bustamante A(1), Rosell A(1), Montaner J(5).

Author information: 
(1)Neurovascular Research Laboratory, Vall d'Hebron Institute of Research (VHIR),
Universitat Autònoma de Barcelona, Barcelona, Spain.
(2)Bioinformatics and Biostatistics Unit, Vall d'Hebron Institute of Research
(VHIR), Universitat Autònoma de Barcelona, Barcelona, Spain; Genetics,
Microbiology and Statistics Dept., Universitat de Barcelona, Barcelona, Spain.
(3)Bioinformatics and Biostatistics Unit, Vall d'Hebron Institute of Research
(VHIR), Universitat Autònoma de Barcelona, Barcelona, Spain.
(4)Proteomics Laboratory, Vall d'Hebron Institute of Oncology (VHIO), Universitat
Autònoma de Barcelona, Barcelona, Spain.
(5)Neurovascular Research Laboratory, Vall d'Hebron Institute of Research (VHIR),
Universitat Autònoma de Barcelona, Barcelona, Spain. Electronic address:
joan.montaner@vhir.org.

Stroke remains a leading cause of death and disability worldwide. Despite
continuous advances, the identification of key molecular signatures in the
hyper-acute phase of ischemic stroke is still a primary interest for
translational research on stroke diagnosis, prognosis, and treatment. Data
integration from high-throughput -omics techniques has become crucial to
unraveling key interactions among different molecular elements in complex
biological contexts, such as ischemic stroke. Thus, we used advanced data
integration methods for a multi-level joint analysis of transcriptomics and
proteomics data sets obtained from mouse brains at 2 h after cerebral ischemia.
By modeling net-like correlation structures, we identified an integrated network 
of genes and proteins that are differentially expressed at a very early stage
after stroke. We validated 10 of these deregulated elements in acute stroke, and 
changes in their expression pattern over time after cerebral ischemia were
described. Of these, CLDN20, GADD45G, RGS2, BAG5, and CTNND2 were next evaluated 
as blood biomarkers of cerebral ischemia in mice and human blood samples, which
were obtained from stroke patients and patients presenting stroke-mimicking
conditions. Our findings indicate that CTNND2 levels in blood might potentially
be useful for distinguishing ischemic strokes from stroke-mimicking conditions in
the hyper-acute phase of the disease. Furthermore, circulating GADD45G content
within the first 6 h after stroke could also play a key role in predicting poor
outcomes in stroke patients. For the first time, we have used an integrative
biostatistical approach to elucidate key molecules in the initial stages of
stroke pathophysiology and highlight new notable molecules that might be further 
considered as blood biomarkers of ischemic stroke.

© 2020 Simats et al.

DOI: 10.1074/mcp.RA120.002283 
PMCID: PMC7710142 [Available on 2021-12-01]
PMID: 32868372 

Conflict of interest statement: Conflict of interest—The authors declared no
potential conflicts of interest with respect to the research, authorship, and/or 
publication of this article.

