
1. NPJ Breast Cancer. 2020 Aug 14;6:37. doi: 10.1038/s41523-020-00178-5. eCollection
2020.

DAXX-inducing phytoestrogens inhibit ER+ tumor initiating cells and delay tumor
development.

Peiffer DS(1), Ma E(1), Wyatt D(2), Albain KS(3), Osipo C(2)(4).

Author information: 
(1)MD/PhD and Integrated Cell Biology Programs, Loyola University Chicago Stritch
School of Medicine, Maywood, IL United States.
(2)Department of Cancer Biology, Loyola University Chicago, Maywood, IL United
States.
(3)Department of Medicine, Division of Hematology/Oncology, Loyola University
Chicago Stritch School of Medicine, Cardinal Bernardin Cancer Center, Maywood, IL
United States.
(4)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, Loyola University Chicago, Maywood,
IL United States.

Recurrence of estrogen receptor (ER)-positive breast tumors despite
curative-intent adjuvant therapy is thought to be due to enrichment of tumor
initiating cells (TIC) during endocrine therapy (ET). Recently, it was identified
that by antagonizing the ER, ET promotes rapid degradation of the
death-associated factor 6 (DAXX) protein, which is necessary and sufficient to
potently inhibit TICs. Thus, the goal of the current study was to identify a
DAXX-inducing agent to inhibit TICs and prevent proliferation of the tumor.
Phytoestrogens (naringenin, resveratrol, genistein, apigenin, and quercetin) were
screened for DAXX protein expression, anti-TIC and anti-proliferative efficacy in
vitro and in vivo. Specific DAXX-inducing phytoestrogens were tested to assess
selectivity towards ERα and/or ERβ. Results showed that phytoestrogens tested
induced DAXX protein expression and inhibited survival of TICs from ER+ MCF-7 and
T47D cells. Only naringenin, resveratrol, and quercetin did not stimulate total
cell proliferation. Naringenin, resveratrol, but not quercetin inhibited survival
of TICs in vitro and in vivo in a DAXX-dependent manner. Naringenin-induced DAXX 
protein expression and inhibition of TICs seemed to be more selective towards ERβ
while resveratrol was more selective through ERα. Naringenin or resveratrol
inhibited the rate of tumor initiation and rate of tumor growth in a
DAXX-dependent manner. These results suggest that a therapeutic approach using a 
phytoestrogen to induce DAXX protein expression could potently inhibit TICs
within a tumor to delay or prevent tumor initiation. Therefore, a DAXX-promoting 
phytoestrogen should be explored for prevention of tumor progression in advanced 
disease and relapse in the adjuvant setting.

© The Author(s) 2020.

DOI: 10.1038/s41523-020-00178-5 
PMCID: PMC7429502
PMID: 32864429 

Conflict of interest statement: Competing interestsThe authors declare no
competing interests.

