
1. Clin Exp Rheumatol. 2020 Sep 3. [Epub ahead of print]

Atherosclerosis in rheumatoid arthritis: associations between
anti-cytomegalovirus IgG antibodies, CD4+CD28null T-cells, CD8+CD28null T-cells
and intima-media thickness.

Wahlin B(1), Fasth AER(2), Karp K(3), Lejon K(4), Malmström V(2), Rahbar A(5),
Wållberg-Jonsson S(6), Södergren A(7).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Public Health and Clinical Medicine/Rheumatology, Umeå
University, Sweden. bengt.wahlin@umu.se.
(2)Rheumatology Division, Department of Medicine at Solna, Karolinska University 
Hospital, Karolinska Institutet, Stockholm, Sweden.
(3)Department of Surgical and Perioperative Sciences/Clinical physiology, Umeå
University, Sweden.
(4)Department of Clinical Microbiology, Infection and Immunology, Umeå
University, Sweden.
(5)Division of Microbial Pathogens, BioClinicum, Department of Medicine at Solna,
Karolinska Universtity Hospital, Karolinska Institutet, Stockholm, Sweden.
(6)Department of Public Health and Clinical Medicine/Rheumatology, Umeå
University, Sweden.
(7)Department of Public Health and Clinical Medicine/Rheumatology, Umeå
University, and Wallenberg Centre for Molecular Medicine (WCMM), Umeå University,
Sweden.

OBJECTIVES: Patients with rheumatoid arthritis (RA) have an accelerated
progression of atherosclerosis. The aims of this study were to study the
associations between subsets of T-cells, subclinical atherosclerosis assessed by 
intima-media thickness (IMT) and serological status for CMV in patients with RA.
METHODS: Patients with new-onset RA (n=79), aged ≤60 years at diagnosis, were
included in a prospective study of atherosclerosis. Controls matched for age and 
sex were also included (n=44). Ultrasound measurement of IMT in the common
carotid artery was undertaken at inclusion (T0), after 1.5 years (T1.5) and after
11 years (T11). At T11, flow-cytometry analysis was undertaken to investigate
subsets of T-cells. Serological analysis for CMV was undertaken from samples
collected at T0.
RESULTS: At T0, 66% of the patients and controls were CMV immunoglobulin
G-positive. CMV-IgG positive patients had a significantly more rapid increase in 
IMT at T1.5, compared with controls and CMV-IgG negative patients. CMV-IgG
positive patients had a significantly higher percentage of T-cells lacking CD28
(both CD4+CD28null and CD8+CD28null T-cells) than CMV-IgG negative patients.
Increased levels of CD4+CD28null and CD8+CD28null T-cells were significantly
associated with IMT at T11, adjusted for systolic blood pressure. CX3CR1 was
expressed in CD4+ and CD8+ CD28null T-cells, but CX3CR1 per se was not associated
with increased IMT.
CONCLUSIONS: Presence of CMV IgG-antibodies in patients with RA is associated
with altered T-cell-populations and an increased burden of atherosclerosis. A
possible protective effect of antiviral treatment in CMV-positive patients with
new-onset RA should be considered.


PMID: 32896254 

