
1. Chem Commun (Camb). 2020 Oct 1;56(78):11528-11547. doi: 10.1039/d0cc04955g.

The role of chemoenzymatic synthesis in advancing trehalose analogues as tools
for combatting bacterial pathogens.

Kalera K(1), Stothard AI(1), Woodruff PJ(2), Swarts BM(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Chemistry and Biochemistry, Central Michigan University, Mount
Pleasant, MI, USA. ben.swarts@cmich.edu.
(2)Department of Chemistry, University of Southern Maine, Portland, ME, USA.

Trehalose, a disaccharide of glucose, is increasingly recognized as an important 
contributor to virulence in major bacterial pathogens, such as Mycobacterium
tuberculosis, Clostridioides difficile, and Burkholderia pseudomallei.
Accordingly, bacterial trehalose metabolic pathways that are not present in
humans have gained traction as targets for antibiotic and diagnostic development.
Toward this goal, trehalose can be modified through a combination of rational
design and synthesis to produce functionalized trehalose analogues, which can be 
deployed to probe or inhibit bacterial trehalose metabolism. However, the unique 
α,α-1,1-glycosidic bond and C2 symmetry of trehalose make analogue synthesis via 
traditional chemical methods very challenging. We and others have turned to the
creation of chemoenzymatic synthesis methods, which in principle allow the use of
nature's trehalose-synthesizing enzymes to stereo- and regioselectively couple
simple, unprotected substrates to efficiently and conveniently generate trehalose
analogues. Here, we provide a contextual account of our team's development of a
trehalose analogue synthesis method that employs a highly substrate-tolerant,
thermostable trehalose synthase enzyme, TreT from Thermoproteus tenax. Then, in
three vignettes, we highlight how chemoenzymatic synthesis has accelerated the
development of trehalose-based imaging probes and inhibitors that target
trehalose-utilizing bacterial pathogens. We describe the role of TreT catalysis
and related methods in the development of (i) tools for in vitro and in vivo
imaging of mycobacteria, (ii) anti-biofilm compounds that sensitize drug-tolerant
mycobacteria to clinical anti-tubercular compounds, and (iii)
degradation-resistant trehalose analogues that block trehalose metabolism in C.
difficile and potentially other trehalose-utilizing bacteria. We conclude by
recapping progress and discussing priorities for future research in this area,
including improving the scope and scale of chemoenzymatic synthesis methods to
support translational research and expanding the functionality and applicability 
of trehalose analogues to study and target diverse bacterial pathogens.

DOI: 10.1039/d0cc04955g 
PMCID: PMC7919099 [Available on 2021-10-01]
PMID: 32914793 

