
1. J Glob Antimicrob Resist. 2020 Dec;23:167-173. doi: 10.1016/j.jgar.2020.08.022.
Epub 2020 Sep 21.

Italian young doctors' knowledge, attitudes and practices on antibiotic use and
resistance: A national cross-sectional survey.

Di Gennaro F(1), Marotta C(1), Amicone M(2), Bavaro DF(3), Bernaudo F(4),
Frisicale EM(5), Kurotschka PK(6), Mazzari A(7), Veronese N(8), Murri R(9),
Fantoni M(9).

Author information: 
(1)Italian Young Medical Doctors Association, Italy; Department of Epidemiology
and Prevention, IRCCS Istituto Neurologico Mediterraneo Neuromed, 86077 Pozzilli,
Italy.
(2)Italian Young Medical Doctors Association, Italy; Department of Public Health,
Nephrology Unit, University of Naples Federico II, Naples, Italy.
(3)Italian Young Medical Doctors Association, Italy; Department of Biomedical
Sciences and Human Oncology, University of Bari 'Aldo Moro', Clinic of Infectious
Diseases, Piazza G. Cesare 11, 70124 Bari, Italy. Electronic address:
davidebavaro@gmail.com.
(4)Italian Young Medical Doctors Association, Italy; Local Health Authority (ASP)
Catanzaro, Italy.
(5)Italian Young Medical Doctors Association, Italy; Local Health Authority (ASL)
Roma 1, Rome, Italy; Department of Woman and Child Health and Public Health -
Public Health Area, Fondazione Policlinico Universitario A. Gemelli IRCCS, Rome, 
Italy.
(6)Italian Young Medical Doctors Association, Italy; Department of Medical
Science and Public Health, University of Cagliari, Cagliari, Italy.
(7)Division of General Surgery, Cristo Re Hospital, Rome, Italy.
(8)University of Palermo, Geriatrics Department, Palermo, Italy.
(9)Department di Clinica delle Malattie Infettive, Università Cattolica S Cuore, 
Fondazione Policlinico A Gemelli IRCCS, Rome, Italy.

OBJECTIVES: Antimicrobial resistance (AMR) is one of the major health issues
worldwide. Clinicians should play a central role to fight AMR, and medical
training is a pivotal issue to combat it; therefore, assessing levels of
knowledge, attitudes and practices among young doctors is essential for future
antimicrobial stewardship (AMS) programmes.
METHODS: A nationwide, cross-sectional, multicentre survey was conducted in
Italy. A descriptive analysis of knowledge and attitudes was performed, along
with a univariate and multivariate analysis of their determinants.
RESULTS: Overall, 1179 young doctors accessed the survey and 1055 (89.5%)
completed all sections. Regarding the knowledge section of the questionnaire,
almost all participants declared to know the different species of bacteria
proposed, however the percentage of participants who correctly responded to
clinical quizzes was 23% for the question on vancomycin-resistant enterococci
(VRE), 42% on carbapenem-resistant Enterobacteriaceae (CRE), 32% on
extended-spectrum β-lactamase-producing enterobacteria (ESBL) and 27% on
methicillin-resistantStaphylococcus aureus (MRSA). Similarly, 81% of participants
disagreed in stating that AMR was adequately addressed during their medical
training and 71% disagreed that they received the right example from their
tutors. Finally, a high rate of agreement with the proposed actions to combat AMR
was documented; in particular, the percentage agreement was 76% for respondents
who agreed to be part of an active surveillance system or AMS programme.
CONCLUSIONS: Tackling AMR should be a priority for politicians and for all health
workers. Inclusion of competencies in antibiotic use in all specialty curricula
is urgently needed.

Copyright © 2020 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Ltd.. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jgar.2020.08.022 
PMID: 32971291 

