
1. Environ Res. 2020 Oct;189:109888. doi: 10.1016/j.envres.2020.109888. Epub 2020
Jul 15.

Lung function of primary cooks using LPG or biomass and the effect of particulate
matter on airway epithelial barrier integrity.

Stapleton EM(1), Kizhakke Puliyakote A(2), Metwali N(3), Jeronimo M(4), Thornell 
IM(5), Manges RB(6), Bilas M(7), Kamal Batcha MA(8), Kumaravel MS(8), Durairaj
K(9), Karuppusamy K(10), Kathiresan G(11), Rahim SA(12), Shanmugam K(13), Thorne 
PS(14), Peters TM(15), Hoffman EA(16), Comellas AP(17).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Internal Medicine, Roy J. and Lucille A. Carver College of
Medicine, University of Iowa, Iowa City, IA, United States. Electronic address:
Emma-stapleton@uiowa.edu.
(2)Department of Radiology, School of Health Sciences, University of California, 
San Diego, United States. Electronic address: akizhakkepuliyakote@ucsd.edu.
(3)Department of Occupational and Environmental Health, College of Public Health,
University of Iowa, Iowa City, IA, United States. Electronic address:
Nervana-metwali@uiowa.edu.
(4)School of Population and Public Health, University of British Columbia,
Vancouver, British Columbia, V6T1Z3, Canada. Electronic address:
Matty-jeronimo@ubc.ca.
(5)Department of Internal Medicine, Roy J. and Lucille A. Carver College of
Medicine, University of Iowa, Iowa City, IA, United States. Electronic address:
Ian-thornell@uiowa.edu.
(6)Department of Internal Medicine, Roy J. and Lucille A. Carver College of
Medicine, University of Iowa, Iowa City, IA, United States. Electronic address:
robert-manges@uiowa.edu.
(7)Department of Radiology, University of Iowa, Iowa City, IA, United States.
Electronic address: Monalisa-bilas@uiowa.edu.
(8)National Pharma Hospital and Research Institute, Thanjavur, Tamil Nadu, India.
(9)Centre for Research and Development, Ponnaiah Ramajayam Institute of Science
and Technology, Thanjavur, Tamil Nadu, India. Electronic address:
kumardurai1963@gmail.com.
(10)Department of Physics, Periyar Maniammai Institute of Science and Technology,
Thanjavur, Tamil Nadu, India.
(11)Department of Electronics and Communication Engineering, Periyar Maniammai
Institute of Science and Technology, Thanjavur, Tamil Nadu, India. Electronic
address: rktgeetha@gmail.com.
(12)Department of Chemistry, Periyar Maniammai Institute of Science and
Technology, Thanjavur, Tamil Nadu, India. Electronic address:
sirajunnisaadr@gmail.com.
(13)Department of Biotechnology, Periyar Maniammai Institute of Science and
Technology, Thanjavur, Tamil Nadu, India. Electronic address: kumarans@pmu.edu.
(14)Department of Occupational and Environmental Health, College of Public
Health, University of Iowa, Iowa City, IA, United States. Electronic address:
peter-thorne@uiowa.edu.
(15)Department of Occupational and Environmental Health, College of Public
Health, University of Iowa, Iowa City, IA, United States. Electronic address:
Thomas-m-peters@uiowa.edu.
(16)Department of Internal Medicine, Roy J. and Lucille A. Carver College of
Medicine, University of Iowa, Iowa City, IA, United States; Department of
Radiology, University of Iowa, Iowa City, IA, United States; Department of
Biomedical Engineering, University of Iowa, Iowa City, IA, United States.
Electronic address: Eric-hoffman@uiowa.edu.
(17)Department of Internal Medicine, Roy J. and Lucille A. Carver College of
Medicine, University of Iowa, Iowa City, IA, United States. Electronic address:
Alejandro-comellas@uiowa.edu.

BACKGROUND: Cooks exposed to biomass fuel experience increased risk of
respiratory disease and mortality. We sought to characterize lung function and
environmental exposures of primary cooking women using two fuel-types in
southeastern India, as well as to investigate the effect of particulate matter
(PM) from kitchens on human airway epithelial (HAE) cells in vitro.
METHODS: We assessed pre- and post-bronchodilator lung function on 25 primary
female cooks using wood biomass or liquified petroleum gas (LPG), and quantified 
exposures from 34 kitchens (PM2.5, PM < 40 μm, black carbon, endotoxin, and PM
metal and bacterial content). We then challenged HAE cells with PM, assessing its
cytotoxicity to small-airway cells (A549) and its effect on: transepithelial
conductance and macromolecule permeability (NuLi cells), and antimicrobial
activity (using airway surface liquid, ASL, from primary HAE cells).
RESULTS: Lung function was impaired in cooks using both fuel-types. 60% of
participants in both fuel-types had respiratory restriction (post bronchodilator 
FEV1/FVC>90). The remaining 40% in the LPG group had normal spirometry (post
FEV1/FVC = 80-90), while only 10% of participants in the biomass group had normal
spirometry, and the remaining biomass cooks (30%) had respiratory obstruction
(post FEV1/FVC<80). Significant differences were found in environmental
parameters, with biomass kitchens containing greater PM2.5, black carbon,
zirconium, arsenic, iron, vanadium, and endotoxin concentrations. LPG kitchens
tended to have more bacteria (p = 0.14), and LPG kitchen PM had greater sulphur
concentrations (p = 0.02). In vitro, PM induced cytotoxicity in HAE A549 cells in
a dose-dependent manner, however the effect was minimal and there were no
differences between fuel-types. PM from homes of participants with a restrictive 
physiology increased electrical conductance of NuLi HAE cells (p = 0.06) and
decreased macromolar permeability (p ≤ 0.05), while PM from homes of those with
respiratory obstruction tended to increase electrical conductance (p = 0.20) and 
permeability (p = 0.07). PM from homes of participants with normal spirometry did
not affect conductance or permeability. PM from all homes tended to inhibit
antimicrobial activity of primary HAE cell airway surface liquid (p = 0.06).
CONCLUSIONS: Biomass cooks had airway obstruction, and significantly greater
concentrations of kitchen environmental contaminants than LPG kitchens. PM from
homes of participants with respiratory restriction and obstruction altered airway
cell barrier function, elucidating mechanisms potentially responsible for
respiratory phenotypes observed in biomass cooks.

Copyright © 2020 The Author(s). Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.envres.2020.109888 
PMCID: PMC7525042 [Available on 2021-10-01]
PMID: 32979995  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

