
1. J Biol Chem. 2020 Nov 20;295(47):15797-15809. doi: 10.1074/jbc.RA120.013772. Epub
2020 Sep 29.

A saturating mutagenesis CRISPR-Cas9-mediated functional genomic screen
identifies cis- and trans-regulatory elements of Oct4 in murine ESCs.

Canver MC(1), Tripathi P(2), Bullen MJ(2), Olshansky M(3), Kumar Y(2), Wong
LH(4), Turner SJ(5), Lessard S(6), Pinello L(7), Orkin SH(8), Das PP(9).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Hematology/Oncology, Boston Children's Hospital and Department of 
Pediatric Oncology, Dana-Farber Cancer Institute (DFCI), Harvard Stem Cell
Institute, Harvard Medical School, Boston, Massachusetts, USA.
(2)Department of Anatomy and Developmental Biology, Monash University, Clayton,
Victoria, Australia; Development and Stem Cells Program, Monash Biomedicine
Discovery Institute, Monash University, Clayton, Victoria, Australia.
(3)Department of Microbiology, Monash Biomedicine Discovery Institute, Monash
University, Clayton, Victoria, Australia; Computational Biology and
Bioinformatics, Baker Heart and Diabetes Institute, Melbourne, Victoria,
Australia.
(4)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Cancer Program, Monash
Biomedicine Discovery Institute, Monash University, Clayton, Victoria, Australia.
(5)Department of Microbiology, Monash Biomedicine Discovery Institute, Monash
University, Clayton, Victoria, Australia; Department of Microbiology and
Immunology, University of Melbourne, Parkville, Victoria, Australia.
(6)Research Center, Montreal Heart Institute, Montréal, Quebec, Canada;
Department of Medicine, Faculty of Medicine, Université de Montréal, Montréal,
Quebec, Canada.
(7)Molecular Pathology and Cancer Center, Massachusetts General Hospital and
Harvard Medical School, Boston, Massachusetts, USA.
(8)Division of Hematology/Oncology, Boston Children's Hospital and Department of 
Pediatric Oncology, Dana-Farber Cancer Institute (DFCI), Harvard Stem Cell
Institute, Harvard Medical School, Boston, Massachusetts, USA; Howard Hughes
Medical Institute, Boston, Massachusetts, USA. Electronic address:
stuart_orkin@dfci.harvard.edu.
(9)Department of Anatomy and Developmental Biology, Monash University, Clayton,
Victoria, Australia; Development and Stem Cells Program, Monash Biomedicine
Discovery Institute, Monash University, Clayton, Victoria, Australia. Electronic 
address: partha.das@monash.edu.

Regulatory elements (REs) consist of enhancers and promoters that occupy a
significant portion of the noncoding genome and control gene expression programs 
either in cis or in trans Putative REs have been identified largely based on
their regulatory features (co-occupancy of ESC-specific transcription factors,
enhancer histone marks, and DNase hypersensitivity) in mouse embryonic stem cells
(mESCs). However, less has been established regarding their regulatory functions 
in their native context. We deployed cis- and trans-regulatory elements scanning 
through saturating mutagenesis and sequencing (ctSCAN-SMS) to target elements
within the ∼12-kb cis-region (cis-REs; CREs) of the Oct4 gene locus, as well as
genome-wide 2,613 high-confidence trans-REs (TREs), in mESCs. ctSCAN-SMS
identified 10 CREs and 12 TREs as novel candidate REs of the Oct4 gene in mESCs. 
Furthermore, deletions of these candidate REs confirmed that the majority of the 
REs are functionally active, and CREs are more active than TREs in controlling
Oct4 gene expression. A subset of active CREs and TREs physically interact with
the Oct4 promoter to varying degrees; specifically, a greater number of active
CREs, compared with active TREs, physically interact with the Oct4 promoter.
Moreover, comparative genomics analysis reveals that a greater number of active
CREs than active TREs are evolutionarily conserved between mice and primates,
including humans. Taken together, our study demonstrates the reliability and
robustness of ctSCAN-SMS screening to identify critical REs and investigate their
roles in the regulation of transcriptional output of a target gene (in this case 
Oct4) in their native context.

© 2020 Canver et al.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.RA120.013772 
PMCID: PMC7681025
PMID: 32994224  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Conflict of interest—The authors declare that
they have no conflicts of interest with the contents of this article.

