
1. PLoS One. 2020 Oct 2;15(10):e0240178. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0240178.
eCollection 2020.

Occurrence of Brucella ceti in striped dolphins from Italian Seas.

Garofolo G(1), Petrella A(2), Lucifora G(3), Di Francesco G(1), Di Guardo G(4),
Pautasso A(5), Iulini B(6), Varello K(6), Giorda F(6)(7), Goria M(6), Dondo A(6),
Zoppi S(6), Di Francesco CE(4), Giglio S(8), Ferringo F(2), Serrecchia L(2),
Ferrantino MAR(2), Zilli K(1), Janowicz A(1), Tittarelli M(1), Mignone W(6),
Casalone C(6), Grattarola C(6).

Author information: 
(1)National and OIE Reference Laboratory for Brucellosis, Istituto
Zooprofilattico Sperimentale dell'Abruzzo e del Molise, Teramo, Italy.
(2)Istituto Zooprofilattico Sperimentale della Puglia e della Basilicata, Foggia,
Italy.
(3)Istituto Zooprofilattico Sperimentale del Mezzogiorno, Vibo Valentia, Italy.
(4)Faculty of Veterinary Medicine, University of Teramo, Teramo, Italy.
(5)ASL.1 Imperiese, Imperia, Italia.
(6)OIE Collaborating Centre Health of Marine Mammals, Istituto Zooprofilattico
Sperimentale del Piemonte, Liguria e Valle d'Aosta, Torino, Italy.
(7)Institute for Animal Health and Food Safety (IUSA), Faculty of Veterinary
Medicine, University of Las Palmas de Gran Canaria, Las Palmas de Gran Canaria,
Canary Islands, Spain.
(8)M.A.R.E. Calabria Association, Montepaone (Catanzaro), Italy.

Brucella ceti infections have been increasingly reported in cetaceans, although a
very limited characterization of Mediterranean Brucella spp. isolates has been
previously reported and relatively few data exist about brucellosis among
cetaceans in Italy. To address this gap, we studied 8 cases of B. ceti infection 
in striped dolphins (Stenella coeruleoalba) stranded along the Italian coastline 
from 2012 to 2018, investigated thanks to the Italian surveillance activity on
stranded cetaceans. We focused on cases of stranding in eastern and western
Italian seas, occurred along the Apulia (N = 6), Liguria (N = 1) and Calabria (N 
= 1) coastlines, through the analysis of gross and microscopic findings, the
results of microbiological, biomolecular and serological investigations, as well 
as the detection of other relevant pathogens. The comparative genomic analysis
used whole genome sequences of B. ceti from Italy paired with the publicly
available complete genomes. Pathological changes consistent with B. ceti
infection were detected in the central nervous system of 7 animals, showing
non-suppurative meningoencephalitis. In 4 cases severe coinfections were
detected, mostly involving Dolphin Morbillivirus (DMV). The severity of B.
ceti-associated lesions supports the role of this microbial agent as a primary
neurotropic pathogen for striped dolphins. We classified the 8 isolates into the 
common sequence type 26 (ST-26). Whole genome SNP analysis showed that the
strains from Italy clustered into two genetically distinct clades. The first
clade comprised exclusively the isolates from Ionian and Adriatic Seas, while the
second one included the strain from the Ligurian Sea and those from the
Catalonian coast. Plotting these clades onto the geographic map suggests a link
between their phylogeny and topographical distribution. These results represent
the first extensive characterization of B. ceti isolated from Italian waters
reported to date and show the usefulness of WGS for understanding of the
evolution of this emerging pathogen.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0240178 
PMCID: PMC7531818
PMID: 33007030  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have declared that no competing
interests exist.

