
1. Sci Rep. 2020 Oct 2;10(1):16438. doi: 10.1038/s41598-020-73442-0.

GC-MS analysis of phytoconstituents from Amomum nilgiricum and molecular docking 
interactions of bioactive serverogenin acetate with target proteins.

Konappa N(1), Udayashankar AC(1), Krishnamurthy S(2), Pradeep CK(1), Chowdappa
S(3), Jogaiah S(4).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Studies in Biotechnology, University of Mysore, 570 006,
Manasagangotri, Mysuru, Karnataka, India.
(2)Department of Microbiology, Field Marshal K. M. Cariappa College, A
Constituent College of Mangalore University, Madikeri, 571201, Karnataka, India.
(3)Department of Microbiology and Biotechnology, Jnanabharathi Campus, Bangalore 
University, Bengaluru, 560 056, Karnataka, India.
(4)Laboratory of Plant Healthcare and Diagnostics, PG Department of Biotechnology
and Microbiology, Karnataka University, Dharwad, Karnataka, India.
jsudish@kud.ac.in.

Amomum nilgiricum is one of the plant species reported from Western Ghats of
India, belonging to the family Zingiberaceae, with ethno-botanical values, and is
well-known for their ethno medicinal applications. In the present investigation, 
ethyl acetate and methanol extracts of A. nilgiricum were analyzed by Fourier
transform infrared spectrometer (FTIR) and gas chromatography-mass spectrometry
(GC-MS) to identify the important functional groups and phytochemical
constituents. The FTIR spectra revealed the occurrence of functional
characteristic peaks of aromatic amines, carboxylic acids, ketones, phenols and
alkyl halides group from leaf and rhizome extracts. The GC-MS analysis of ethyl
acetate and methanol extracts from leaves, and methanol extract from rhizomes of 
A. nilgiricum detected the presence of 25 phytochemical compounds. Further, the
leaf and rhizome extracts of A. nilgiricum showed remarkable antibacterial and
antifungal activities at 100 mg/mL. The results of DPPH and ferric reducing
antioxidant power assay recorded maximum antioxidant activity in A. nilgiricum
methanolic leaf extract. While, ethyl acetate leaf extract exhibited maximum
α-amylase inhibition activity, followed by methanolic leaf extract exhibiting
aldose reductase inhibition. Subsequently, these 25 identified compounds were
analyzed for their bioactivity through in silico molecular docking studies.
Results revealed that among the phytochemical compounds identified, serverogenin 
acetate might have maximum antibacterial, antifungal, antiviral, antioxidant and 
antidiabetic properties followed by 2,4-dimethyl-1,3-dioxane and
(1,3-13C2)propanedioic acid. To our best knowledge, this is the first description
on the phytochemical constituents of the leaves and rhizomes of A. nilgiricum,
which show pharmacological significance, as there has been no literature
available yet on GC-MS and phytochemical studies of this plant species. The in
silico molecular docking of serverogenin acetate was also performed to confirm
its broad spectrum activities based on the binding interactions with the
antibacterial, antifungal, antiviral, antioxidant and antidiabetic target
proteins. The results of the present study will create a way for the invention of
herbal medicines for several ailments by using A. nilgiricum plants, which may
lead to the development of novel drugs.

DOI: 10.1038/s41598-020-73442-0 
PMCID: PMC7532471
PMID: 33009462  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

