
1. PLoS Negl Trop Dis. 2020 Oct 5;14(10):e0008091. doi:
10.1371/journal.pntd.0008091. eCollection 2020 Oct.

Trypanosomatid selenophosphate synthetase structure, function and interaction
with selenocysteine lyase.

da Silva MTA(1), Silva IRE(1), Faim LM(1), Bellini NK(1), Pereira ML(1), Lima
AL(1), de Jesus TCL(1)(2), Costa FC(1)(3), Watanabe TF(4), Pereira HD(1),
Valentini SR(4), Zanelli CF(4), Borges JC(5), Dias MVB(6), da Cunha JPC(2),
Mittra B(7), Andrews NW(7), Thiemann OH(1)(8).

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Structural Biology, Sao Carlos Institute of Physics, University 
of São Paulo, São Carlos, SP, Brazil.
(2)Laboratory of Cell Cycle and Center of Toxins, Immune Response and Cell
Signaling-CeTICS, Butantan Institute, São Paulo, SP, Brazil.
(3)London School of Hygiene and Tropical Medicine, London, United Kingdom.
(4)School of Pharmaceutical Sciences, São Paulo State University (UNESP),
Araraquara, SP, Brazil.
(5)São Carlos Institute of Chemistry, University of São Paulo, São Carlos, SP,
Brazil.
(6)Department of Microbiology, Institute of Biomedical Science, University of São
Paulo, São Paulo, SP, Brazil.
(7)Department of Cell Biology and Molecular Genetics, University of Maryland,
College Park, Maryland, United States of America.
(8)Department of Genetics and Evolution, Federal University of São Carlos, São
Carlos, SP, Brazil.

Eukaryotes from the Excavata superphylum have been used as models to study the
evolution of cellular molecular processes. Strikingly, human parasites of the
Trypanosomatidae family (T. brucei, T. cruzi and L. major) conserve the complex
machinery responsible for selenocysteine biosynthesis and incorporation in
selenoproteins (SELENOK/SelK, SELENOT/SelT and SELENOTryp/SelTryp), although
these proteins do not seem to be essential for parasite viability under
laboratory controlled conditions. Selenophosphate synthetase (SEPHS/SPS) plays an
indispensable role in selenium metabolism, being responsible for catalyzing the
formation of selenophosphate, the biological selenium donor for selenocysteine
synthesis. We solved the crystal structure of the L. major selenophosphate
synthetase and confirmed that its dimeric organization is functionally important 
throughout the domains of life. We also demonstrated its interaction with
selenocysteine lyase (SCLY) and showed that it is not present in other stable
assemblies involved in the selenocysteine pathway, namely the
phosphoseryl-tRNASec kinase (PSTK)-Sec-tRNASec synthase (SEPSECS) complex and the
tRNASec-specific elongation factor (eEFSec) complex. Endoplasmic reticulum stress
with dithiothreitol (DTT) or tunicamycin upon selenophosphate synthetase ablation
in procyclic T. brucei cells led to a growth defect. On the other hand, only DTT 
presented a negative effect in bloodstream T. brucei expressing selenophosphate
synthetase-RNAi. Furthermore, selenoprotein T (SELENOT) was dispensable for both 
forms of the parasite. Together, our data suggest a role for the T. brucei
selenophosphate synthetase in the regulation of the parasite's ER stress
response.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pntd.0008091 
PMCID: PMC7595633
PMID: 33017394  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have declared that no competing
interests exist.

