
1. BMC Genomics. 2020 Oct 6;21(1):692. doi: 10.1186/s12864-020-07102-y.

Distinctive gene and protein characteristics of extremely piezophilic Colwellia.

Peoples LM(1)(2), Kyaw TS(1), Ugalde JA(3), Mullane KK(1), Chastain RA(1),
Yayanos AA(1), Kusube M(4), Methé BA(5), Bartlett DH(6).

Author information: 
(1)Marine Biology Research Division, Scripps Institution of Oceanography,
University of California San Diego, La Jolla, CA, 92093-0202, USA.
(2)Flathead Lake Biological Station, University of Montana, Polson, MT, 59860,
USA.
(3)Millennium Initiative for Collaborative Research on Bacterial Resistance
(MICROB-R), Santiago, Chile.
(4)Department of Material Science, National Institute of Technology, Wakayama
College, 77 Noshima, Nada-cho, Gobo, Wakayama, 644-0023, Japan.
(5)Center for Microbiome and Medicine, University of Pittsburgh, Pittsburgh, PA, 
15213, USA.
(6)Marine Biology Research Division, Scripps Institution of Oceanography,
University of California San Diego, La Jolla, CA, 92093-0202, USA.
dbartlett@ucsd.edu.

BACKGROUND: The deep ocean is characterized by low temperatures, high hydrostatic
pressures, and low concentrations of organic matter. While these conditions
likely select for distinct genomic characteristics within prokaryotes, the
attributes facilitating adaptation to the deep ocean are relatively unexplored.
In this study, we compared the genomes of seven strains within the genus
Colwellia, including some of the most piezophilic microbes known, to identify
genomic features that enable life in the deep sea.
RESULTS: Significant differences were found to exist between piezophilic and
non-piezophilic strains of Colwellia. Piezophilic Colwellia have a more basic and
hydrophobic proteome. The piezophilic abyssal and hadal isolates have more genes 
involved in replication/recombination/repair, cell wall/membrane biogenesis, and 
cell motility. The characteristics of respiration, pilus generation, and membrane
fluidity adjustment vary between the strains, with operons for a nuo
dehydrogenase and a tad pilus only present in the piezophiles. In contrast, the
piezosensitive members are unique in having the capacity for dissimilatory
nitrite and TMAO reduction. A number of genes exist only within deep-sea adapted 
species, such as those encoding d-alanine-d-alanine ligase for peptidoglycan
formation, alanine dehydrogenase for NADH/NAD+ homeostasis, and a SAM
methyltransferase for tRNA modification. Many of these piezophile-specific genes 
are in variable regions of the genome near genomic islands, transposases, and
toxin-antitoxin systems.
CONCLUSIONS: We identified a number of adaptations that may facilitate deep-sea
radiation in members of the genus Colwellia, as well as in other piezophilic
bacteria. An enrichment in more basic and hydrophobic amino acids could help
piezophiles stabilize and limit water intrusion into proteins as a result of high
pressure. Variations in genes associated with the membrane, including those
involved in unsaturated fatty acid production and respiration, indicate that
membrane-based adaptations are critical for coping with high pressure. The
presence of many piezophile-specific genes near genomic islands highlights that
adaptation to the deep ocean may be facilitated by horizontal gene transfer
through transposases or other mobile elements. Some of these genes are amenable
to further study in genetically tractable piezophilic and piezotolerant deep-sea 
microorganisms.

DOI: 10.1186/s12864-020-07102-y 
PMCID: PMC7542103
PMID: 33023469  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

