
1. J Allergy Clin Immunol. 2020 Oct 16. pii: S0091-6749(20)31410-X. doi:
10.1016/j.jaci.2020.09.035. [Epub ahead of print]

Chromatin interactions in differentiating keratinocytes reveal novel atopic
dermatitis- and psoriasis-associated genes.

Sahlén P(1), Spalinskas R(2), Asad S(3), Mahapatra KD(3), Höjer P(2), Anil A(2), 
Eisfeldt J(4), Srivastava A(3), Nikamo P(3), Mukherjee A(3), Kim KH(5), Bergman
O(6), Ståhle M(3), Sonkoly E(7), Pivarcsi A(8), Wahlgren CF(3), Nordenskjöld
M(4), Taylan F(4), Bradley M(9), Tapia-Páez I(3).

Author information: 
(1)KTH Royal Institute of Technology, School of Chemistry, Biotechnology and
Health, Science for Life Laboratory, Stockholm, Sweden. Electronic address:
pelin.akan@scilifelab.se.
(2)KTH Royal Institute of Technology, School of Chemistry, Biotechnology and
Health, Science for Life Laboratory, Stockholm, Sweden.
(3)Dermatology and Venereology Division, Department of Medicine Solna, Karolinska
Institutet, Karolinska University Hospital, Stockholm, Sweden.
(4)Department of Molecular Medicine and Surgery Center for Molecular Medicine,
Karolinska Institutet, Stockholm, Sweden; Department of Clinical Genetics,
Karolinska University Hospital, Stockholm, Sweden.
(5)Basic Research and Innovation Division, Research and Development Unit,
AmorePacific Corporation, Yongin-si, Korea.
(6)Division of Cardiovascular Medicine, Center for Molecular Medicine, Department
of Medicine Solna, Karolinska Institutet, Stockholm, Karolinska University
Hospital, Solna, Sweden.
(7)Dermatology and Venereology Division, Department of Medicine Solna, Karolinska
Institutet, Karolinska University Hospital, Stockholm, Sweden; Dermatology Unit, 
Karolinska University Hospital, Stockholm, Sweden; Department of Cell and
Molecular Biology, Karolinska Institutet, Stockholm, Sweden.
(8)Dermatology and Venereology Division, Department of Medicine Solna, Karolinska
Institutet, Karolinska University Hospital, Stockholm, Sweden; Department of Cell
and Molecular Biology, Karolinska Institutet, Stockholm, Sweden; Department of
Medical Biochemistry and Microbiology, Uppsala University, Uppsala, Sweden.
(9)Dermatology and Venereology Division, Department of Medicine Solna, Karolinska
Institutet, Karolinska University Hospital, Stockholm, Sweden; Dermatology Unit, 
Karolinska University Hospital, Stockholm, Sweden.

BACKGROUND: Hundreds of variants associated with atopic dermatitis (AD) and
psoriasis, 2 common inflammatory skin disorders, have previously been discovered 
through genome-wide association studies (GWASs). The majority of these variants
are in noncoding regions, and their target genes remain largely unclear.
OBJECTIVE: We sought to understand the effects of these noncoding variants on the
development of AD and psoriasis by linking them to the genes that they regulate.
METHODS: We constructed genomic 3-dimensional maps of human keratinocytes during 
differentiation by using targeted chromosome conformation capture (Capture Hi-C) 
targeting more than 20,000 promoters and 214 GWAS variants and combined these
data with transcriptome and epigenomic data sets. We validated our results with
reporter assays, clustered regularly interspaced short palindromic repeats
activation, and examination of patient gene expression from previous studies.
RESULTS: We identified 118 target genes of 82 AD and psoriasis GWAS variants.
Differential expression of 58 of the 118 target genes (49%) occurred in either AD
or psoriatic lesions, many of which were not previously linked to any skin
disease. We highlighted the genes AFG1L, CLINT1, ADO, LINC00302, and RP1-140J1.1 
and provided further evidence for their potential roles in AD and psoriasis.
CONCLUSIONS: Our work focused on skin barrier pathology through investigation of 
the interaction profile of GWAS variants during keratinocyte differentiation. We 
have provided a catalogue of candidate genes that could modulate the risk of AD
and psoriasis. Given that only 35% of the target genes are the gene nearest to
the known GWAS variants, we expect that our work will contribute to the discovery
of novel pathways involved in AD and psoriasis.

Copyright © 2020 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jaci.2020.09.035 
PMID: 33069716 

