
1. J Dermatol Sci. 2020 Dec;100(3):192-200. doi: 10.1016/j.jdermsci.2020.10.004.
Epub 2020 Oct 9.

Activation of aryl hydrocarbon receptor in Langerhans cells by a microbial
metabolite of tryptophan negatively regulates skin inflammation.

Liu X(1), Zhang X(2), Zhang J(1), Luo Y(1), Xu B(1), Ling S(1), Zhang Y(1), Li
W(3), Yao X(4).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Allergy and Rheumatology, Institute of Dermatology, Chinese
Academy of Medical Sciences and Peking Union Medical College, Nanjing, PR China; 
Institute of Dermatology, Jiangsu Key Laboratory of Molecular Biology for Skin
Diseases and STIs, Chinese Academy of Medical Sciences and Peking Union Medical
College, Nanjing, PR China.
(2)Department of Dermatology, The First Medical Center, Chinese PLA General
Hospital, Beijing, PR China.
(3)Department of Dermatology, Huashan Hospital, Fudan University, Shanghai, PR
China. Electronic address: liweiderma@163.com.
(4)Department of Allergy and Rheumatology, Institute of Dermatology, Chinese
Academy of Medical Sciences and Peking Union Medical College, Nanjing, PR China; 
Institute of Dermatology, Jiangsu Key Laboratory of Molecular Biology for Skin
Diseases and STIs, Chinese Academy of Medical Sciences and Peking Union Medical
College, Nanjing, PR China. Electronic address: dryao_xu@126.com.

BACKGROUND: Skin commensal bacteria play important roles in skin homeostasis.
Langerhans cells (LCs) are epidermis-resident dendritic cells that sense
environmental stimuli and are critical in the induction of immune tolerance to
allergen and bacterial skin flora. However, response of LCs to the metabolites of
the skin microbiota is not clear.
OBJECTIVE: To explore the effects of the skin microbial metabolites on LCs
activation.
METHODS: LCs derived from CD34+ hematopoietic stem cells in the cord blood were
treated with a microbial metabolite of tryptophan, indole-3-aldehyde (IAId).
Activation aryl hydrocarbon receptor (AhR) signaling, production of IL-10, and
expression of receptor activator of NF-κB (RANK) / receptor activator of NF-κB
ligand (RANKL) in LCs or keratinocytes were analyzed using quantitative PCR,
western blotting and flow cytometry. LCs maturation induced by IAId and CD4+ T
cell response induced by IAId-conditioned LCs were also investigated.
RESULTS: IAId induced the production of indoleamine 2,3-dioxygenase (IDO) and
IL-10 in LCs through the activation of AhR. IAId promoted the expression of RANK 
and RANKL on LCs and keratinocytes in an AhR-dependent manner respectively, which
might result in activation of NF-κB signaling and production of IL-10. Moreover, 
a mature phenotype of LCs was induced by IAId, and IAId-activated LCs inhibited
CD4+ T cell proliferation and induced IL-10 secretion.
CONCLUSIONS: Our study revealed a negatively regulatory function of a tryptophan 
metabolite on LCs through the activation of AhR, and the microbial metabolites
could be utilized in future treatment for inflammatory skin diseases.

Copyright © 2020 Japanese Society for Investigative Dermatology. Published by
Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jdermsci.2020.10.004 
PMID: 33082071 

