
1. Environ Res. 2020 Oct 22:110352. doi: 10.1016/j.envres.2020.110352. [Epub ahead
of print]

High occurrence of heavy metal tolerance genes in bacteria isolated from
wastewater: A new concern?

Zagui GS(1), Moreira NC(2), Santos DV(3), Darini ALC(2), Domingo JL(4),
Segura-Muñoz SI(1), Andrade LN(5).

Author information: 
(1)College of Nursing of Ribeirão Preto, University of São Paulo, Brazil.
(2)School of Pharmaceutical Sciences of Ribeirão Preto, University of São Paulo, 
Brazil.
(3)Laboratory of Chemical Residues, University of São Paulo, Ribeirão Preto, São 
Paulo, Brazil.
(4)Laboratory of Toxicology and Environmental Health, School of Medicine,
Universitat Rovira i Virgili, 43210, Reus, Catalonia, Spain.
(5)School of Pharmaceutical Sciences of Ribeirão Preto, University of São Paulo, 
Brazil. Electronic address: leonardo@fcfrp.usp.br.

Some heavy metals have antimicrobial activity and are considered as potential
alternatives to traditional antibiotic therapy. However, heavy metal tolerance
genes (HMTG) have been already detected and coding different tolerance
mechanisms. Considering that certain metals are promising for antimicrobial
therapy, evaluation of HMTG dissemination in bacteria from sewage is essential to
understand the evolution of these bacteria and to predict antimicrobial use and
control. The present study aimed to evaluate the occurrence of bacteria carrying 
HMTG in samples of hospital wastewater and from urban wastewater treatment plant 
(WWTP). The acquired HMTG were investigated by PCR in bacterial collection
previously characterized for antibiotic resistant genes (ARGs). HMTG searched
include arsB (arsenic efflux pump), czcA (cadmium, zinc and cobalt efflux pump), 
merA (mercuric reductase), pcoD (copper efflux pump), silA (silver efflux pump)
and terF (tellurite resistance protein). Among 45 isolates, 82% of them carried
at last one HMTG, in which the silA and pcoD tolerance genes were the most
prevalent. A very strong positive correlation was found between these genes (r = 
0.91, p < 0.0001). Tolerance genes merA, arsB, czcA and terF were detected in
47%, 13%, 13% and 7% of the isolates, respectively. It was found that 15 isolates
co-harbored ARGs (β-lactamase encoding genes). HMTG are probably more dispersed
than ARGs in bacteria, representing a new concern for heavy metals use as
effective antimicrobials. To the best of our knowledge, this is the first study
on the HMTG searched in Hafnia alvei, Serratia fonticola and Serratia
liquefaciens. Hospital wastewater treatment implementation and additional
technologies for treatment in WWTP can reduce the impacts on water resources and 
HMTG spread, ensureing the environmental and human health safety.

Copyright © 2020 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.envres.2020.110352 
PMID: 33098821 

