
1. J Cell Mol Med. 2020 Dec;24(23):13634-13647. doi: 10.1111/jcmm.15728. Epub 2020
Oct 28.

Hydrogen sulphide ameliorates dopamine-induced astrocytic inflammation and
neurodegeneration in minimal hepatic encephalopathy.

Zhuge W(1), Zhuge Q(2), Wang W(3), Lu X(4), You R(4), Liu L(4), Yu H(4), Wang
J(4), Wang X(5), Ye Y(6), Ding S(4).

Author information: 
(1)Gastrointestinal Surgery, The First Affiliated Hospital of Wenzhou Medical
University, Wenzhou, Zhejiang, China.
(2)Neurosurgery Department, The First Affiliated Hospital of Wenzhou Medical
University, Wenzhou, Zhejiang, China.
(3)Department of Microbiology, Immunology, and Genetics, University of North
Texas Health Science Center, Fort Worth, TX, USA.
(4)Zhejiang Provincial Key Laboratory of Aging and Neurological Disease Research,
The First Affiliated Hospital of Wenzhou Medical University, Wenzhou, Zhejiang,
China.
(5)Analytical and Testing Center, Wenzhou Medical University, Wenzhou, Zhejiang, 
China.
(6)School of Information and Engineering, Wenzhou Medical University, Wenzhou,
Zhejiang, China.

It has been demonstrated that the action of dopamine (DA) could enhance the
production of tumour necrosis factor-α (TNF-α) by astrocytes and potentiate
neuronal apoptosis in minimal hepatic encephalopathy (MHE). Recently, sodium
hydrosulfide (NaHS) has been found to have neuroprotective properties. Our study 
addressed whether NaHS could rescue DA-challenged inflammation and apoptosis in
neurons to ameliorate memory impairment in MHE rats and in the neuron and
astrocyte coculture system. We found that NaHS suppressed DA-induced p65
acetylation, resulting in reduced TNF-α production in astrocytes both in vitro
and in vivo. Furthermore, decreased apoptosis was observed in neurons exposed to 
conditioned medium from DA + NaHS-challenged astrocytes, which was similar to the
results obtained in the neurons exposed to TNF-α + NaHS, suggesting a therapeutic
effect of NaHS on the suppression of neuronal apoptosis via the reduction of
TNF-α level. DA triggered the inactivation of p70 S6 ribosomal kinase (S6K1) and 
dephosphorylation of Bad, resulting in the disaggregation of Bclxl and Bak and
the release of cytochrome c (Cyt. c), and this process could be reversed by NaHS 
administration. Our work demonstrated that NaHS attenuated DA-induced astrocytic 
TNF-α release and ameliorated inflammation-induced neuronal apoptosis in MHE.
Further research into this approach may uncover future potential therapeutic
strategies for MHE.

© 2020 The Authors. Journal of Cellular and Molecular Medicine published by
Foundation for Cellular and Molecular Medicine and John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/jcmm.15728 
PMCID: PMC7753993
PMID: 33118312 

