
1. J Immunother Cancer. 2020 Oct;8(2). pii: e001038. doi: 10.1136/jitc-2020-001038.

Synergizing sunitinib and radiofrequency ablation to treat hepatocellular cancer 
by triggering the antitumor immune response.

Qi X(1), Yang M(1), Ma L(2)(3), Sauer M(4), Avella D(1)(5), Kaifi JT(1)(5), Bryan
J(6), Cheng K(7), Staveley-O'Carroll KF(8)(3), Kimchi ET(8)(3), Li G(8)(9).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Surgery, University of Missouri, Columbia, Missouri, USA.
(2)Department of Radiology, University of Missouri, Columbia, Missouri, USA.
(3)Harry S. Truman Memorial VA Hospital, Columbia, Missouri, USA.
(4)School of Medicine, University of Missouri, Columbia, Missouri, USA.
(5)Ellis Fischel Cancer Center, University of Missouri, Columbia, Missouri, USA.
(6)Department of Veterinary Oncology, University of Missouri, Columbia, Missouri,
USA.
(7)Pharmacology and Pharmaceutical Sciences, University of Missouri Kansas City, 
Kansas City, Missouri, USA.
(8)Department of Surgery, University of Missouri, Columbia, Missouri, USA
liguan@health.missouri.edu kimchie@health.missouri.edu
ocarrollk@health.missouri.edu.
(9)Department of Molecular Microbiology and Immunology, University of Missouri,
Columbia, Missouri, USA.

BACKGROUND: Minimally invasive radiofrequency ablation (RFA) is used as a
first-line treatment option for hepatocellular cancer (HCC) with the weaknesses
of incomplete ablation, tumor recurrence, and inferior outcomes. To overcome this
limitation, we proposed to develop sunitinib-RFA integrated therapy with a
potential of activating anti-HCC immune response.
METHODS: Using our unique murine model, we developed a novel RFA platform with a 
modified human cardiac RF generator. Therapeutic efficacy of sunitinib-RFA
combined treatment in HCC was tested in this platform. Tumor progression was
monitored by MRI; tumor necrosis and apoptosis were detected by H&E and terminal 
deoxynucleotidyl transferase dUTP nick end labeling; immune reaction was defined 
by flow cytometry; and signaling molecules were examined with real-time PCR
(qPCR), western blot, and immunohistochemical staining.
RESULTS: A significantly reduced tumor growth and extended lift span were
observed in the mice receiving combined treatment with RFA and sunitinib. This
combined treatment significantly increased the frequency of CD8+ T cell, memory
CD8+ T cell, and dendritic cells (DCs); decreased the frequency of regulatory T
cells; and activated tumor-specific antigen (TSA) immune response in tumor
microenvironment. We found that RFA caused PD-1 upregulation in tumor-infiltrated
T cells by boosting hepatocyte growth factor (HGF) expression, which was
suppressed by sunitinib treatment. We have also demonstrated that sunitinib
suppressed VEGF's effect in enhancing PD-L1 expression in DCs and attenuated
heat-sink effect. The results indicate that RFA induced tumor destruction and
release of in situ TSAs which can activate a tumoricidal immune response in
sunitinib-treated mice, significantly improving anti-HCC therapeutic efficacy.
CONCLUSIONS: Sunitinib enables RFA-released in situ TSA to ignite an effective
anti-tumor immune response by suppressing HGF and VEGF signaling pathways.
Sunitinib-RFA as a synergistic therapeutic approach significantly suppresses HCC 
growth.

© Author(s) (or their employer(s)) 2020. Re-use permitted under CC BY-NC. No
commercial re-use. See rights and permissions. Published by BMJ.

DOI: 10.1136/jitc-2020-001038 
PMCID: PMC7594543
PMID: 33115942 

Conflict of interest statement: Competing interests: None declared.

