
1. Int J Stem Cells. 2021 Feb 28;14(1):58-73. doi: 10.15283/ijsc19121.

TL1A/TNFR2 Axis Enhances Immunoregulatory Effects of Bone Marrow Derived
Mesenchymal Stem Cell by Indian Hedgehog Signaling Pathway.

Al-Azab M(1)(2), Walana W(1)(3), Wei J(1), Li W(1), Tang Y(1), Wei X(4),
Almoiliqy M(5), Shopit A(5), Abbas EE(6), Adlat S(7), Awsh M(5), Li X(1), Wang
B(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Immunology, College of Basic Medical Science, Dalian Medical
University, Liaoning, China.
(2)Department of Immunology, Guangzhou Institute of Pediatrics, Guangzhou Women
and Children's Medical Center, Guangzhou Medical University, Guangzhou, China.
(3)Department of Clinical Microbiology, School of Medicine and Health Sciences,
University for Development Studies, Tamale, Ghana.
(4)Molecular Medicine Laboratory, College of Basic Medical Science, Dalian
Medical University, Liaoning, China.
(5)Department of Pharmacology, College of Pharmacy, Dalian Medical University,
Liaoning, China.
(6)Microbiology Laboratory, College of Basic Medical Science, Dalian Medical
University, Liaoning, China.
(7)Key Laboratory of Molecular Epigenetics of MOE, School of Life Science,
Northeast Normal University, Changchun, China.

Background and Objectives: The immunomodulatory potential of mesenchymal stem
cells (MSCs) can be regulated by a variety of molecules, especially cytokines.
The inflammatory cytokine, TNF-like ligand 1A (TL1A), has been reported as an
inflammation stimulator in-multiple autoimmune diseases. Here, we studied the
effects of TL1A/TNF-receptor 2 (TNFR2) pathway on the therapeutic potency of bone
marrow-derived MSCs (BMSCs).
Methods and Results: BMSCs, fibroblast-like synoviocytes (FLSs), and H9 and
jurkat human T lymphocytes were used in this study. BMSCs paracrine activities,
differentiation, proliferation, and migration were investigated after stimulation
with TL1A, and intervened with anti-TNFR2. Additionally, the effects of TL1A on
BMSCs therapeutic potency were evaluated by treating RA-FLSs, and H9 and jurkat T
cells with TL1A-stimulated BMSCs conditioned medium (CM). Indian hedgehog (IHH)
involvement was determined by gene silencing and treatment by recombinant IHH
(rIHH). TL1A induced BMSCs stemness-related genes, COX-2, IL-6, IDO, TGF-β and
HGF through TNFR2. Also, TL1A corrected biased differentiation and increased
proliferation, and migration through TNFR2. Meanwhile, CM of TL1A-stimulated
BMSCs decreased the inflammatory markers of RA-FLSs and T cells. Moreover,
TL1A-stimulated BMSCs experienced IHH up-regulation coupled with NF-κB and STAT3 
signaling up-regulation, while p53 and oxidative stress were down-regulated.
Furthermore, treatment of BMSCs by rIHH increased their anti-inflammatory
effects. More importantly, knockdown of IHH decreased the ability of
TL1A-stimulated BMSCs to alleviating the inflammation in RA-FLSs and T cells.
Conclusions: This study reports the effects of TL1A/TNFR2 pathway on the
biological behaviors and therapeutic potency of BMSCs through IHH. These findings
could introduce novel procedures to increase the stemness of MSCs in cellular
therapy.

DOI: 10.15283/ijsc19121 
PMCID: PMC7904531
PMID: 33122466 

