
1. PLoS One. 2020 Nov 4;15(11):e0241748. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0241748.
eCollection 2020.

Effect of antibiotic gut microbiota disruption on LPS-induced acute lung
inflammation.

Jacobs MC(1), Lankelma JM(1), Wolff NS(1), Hugenholtz F(1), de Vos AF(1), van der
Poll T(1)(2), Wiersinga WJ(1)(2).

Author information: 
(1)Center for Experimental and Molecular Medicine, Amsterdam UMC, Location
Academic Medical Center (AMC), Amsterdam Infection & Immunity Institute,
University of Amsterdam, Amsterdam, The Netherlands.
(2)Division of Infectious Diseases, Department of Medicine, Amsterdam UMC,
Location Academic Medical Center (AMC), Amsterdam Infection & Immunity Institute,
University of Amsterdam, Amsterdam, The Netherlands.

BACKGROUND: An increasing body of evidence is indicating that the gut microbiota 
modulates pulmonary inflammatory responses. This so-called gut-lung axis might be
of importance in a whole spectrum of inflammatory pulmonary diseases such as
acute respiratory distress syndrome, chronic obstructive pulmonary disease and
pneumonia. Here, we investigate the effect of antibiotic disruption of gut
microbiota on immune responses in the lung after a intranasal challenge with
lipopolysaccharide (LPS).
METHODS/RESULTS: C57Bl/6 mice were treated for two weeks with broad-spectrum
antibiotics supplemented to their drinking water. Afterwards, mice and untreated 
control mice were inoculated intranasally with LPS. Mice were sacrificed 2 and 6 
hours post-challenge, after which bronchoalveolar lavage fluid (BALF) and lung
tissues were taken. Gut microbiota analysis showed that antibiotic-treated mice
had a pronounced reduction in numbers and diversity of bacteria. A modest, but
time consistent, significant increase of interleukin (IL)-6 release was seen in
BALF of antibiotic treated mice. Release of tumor necrosis factor alpha (TNFα),
however, was not statistically different between groups.
CONCLUSION: Antibiotic induced microbiota disruption is associated with
alterations in host responses during LPS-induced lung inflammation. Further
studies are required to determine the clinical relevance of the gut-lung axis in 
pulmonary infection and inflammation.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0241748 
PMCID: PMC7641457
PMID: 33147273  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have declared that no competing
interests exist.

