
1. Food Chem Toxicol. 2020 Dec;146:111844. doi: 10.1016/j.fct.2020.111844. Epub 2020
Nov 3.

Heavy metal and pesticide levels in dairy products: Evaluation of human health
risk.

Năstăsescu V(1), Mititelu M(2), Goumenou M(3), Docea AO(4), Renieri E(5), Udeanu 
DI(6), Oprea E(7), Arsene AL(8), Dinu-Pîrvu CE(9), Ghica M(10).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Physical and Colloidal Chemistry, Faculty of Pharmacy,
University of Medicine and Pharmacy Carol Davila, Bucharest, Romania. Electronic 
address: valentin.nastasescu@umfcd.ro.
(2)Department of Clinical Laboratory and Food Safety, Faculty of Pharmacy,
University of Medicine and Pharmacy Carol Davila, Bucharest, Romania. Electronic 
address: magdalena.mititelu@umfcd.ro.
(3)Centre of Toxicology and Forensic Sciences, Medicine School, University of
Crete, 70013, Heraklion, Greece; General Chemical State Laboratory of Greek
Republic, 71202, Heraklion, Greece. Electronic address:
marina.goumenou@gmail.com.
(4)Department of Toxicology, Faculty of Pharmacy, University of Medicine and
Pharmacy of Craiova, Romania. Electronic address: daoana00@gmail.com.
(5)Laboratory of Toxicology, Medical School, University of Crete, Heraklion,
Greece; HERACLES Research Center on the Exposome and Health, Center for
Interdisciplinary Research and Innovation, Balkan Center, 57001, Thessaloniki,
Greece. Electronic address: elisavet_renieri@hotmail.com.
(6)Department of Clinical Laboratory and Food Safety, Faculty of Pharmacy,
University of Medicine and Pharmacy Carol Davila, Bucharest, Romania. Electronic 
address: denisaudeanu@gmail.com.
(7)Department of Organic Chemistry, Biochemistry and Catalysis, Faculty of
Chemistry, University of Bucharest, Romania. Electronic address:
eliza.oprea2003@g.unibuc.ro.
(8)Department of Pharmaceutical Microbiology, Faculty of Pharmacy, University of 
Medicine and Pharmacy Carol Davila, Bucharest, Romania. Electronic address:
andreea.arsene@umfcd.ro.
(9)Department of Physical and Colloidal Chemistry, Faculty of Pharmacy,
University of Medicine and Pharmacy Carol Davila, Bucharest, Romania. Electronic 
address: ecristinaparvu@yahoo.com.
(10)Department of Biostatistics, Faculty of Pharmacy, University of Medicine and 
Pharmacy Carol Davila, Bucharest, Romania. Electronic address:
manuela.ghica@umfcd.ro.

Cattle milk's health benefits can be compromised by the presence of contaminants.
The levels of cadmium, copper, lead and zinc, and residues of
dichlorodiphenyldichloroethylene (DDE), dichlorodiphenyldichloroethane (DDD),
dichlorodiphenyltrichloroethane (DDT) were determined in soil, milk and cheese
samples collected from cow farms from 3 Romanian areas with industrial and
agriculture tradition. A new methodology was applied for the determination of the
corrected estimated daily intake (cEDI) corresponding to the aggregate dietary
exposure. For the risk assessment, we calculated the source hazard quotient (HQs)
for each contaminant and the adversity specific hazard index (HIA). Cadmium,
copper, lead and zinc, and the sum of DDT levels in soil samples were below
maximum residue levels (MRLs). The MRLs of lead and DDD were exceeded in milk and
cheese samples from all the 3 areas. The MRLs of copper and zinc were exceeded in
cheese samples from area 2 and 3. HQs >10 for lead indicates increased risk,
while HQ > 1 for copper and sum of DDT indicates moderate risk for both milk and 
cheese. By calculating the HIA, we identified a moderate and increase risk for
nephrotoxicity, hepatotoxicity, hematotoxicity, cardiotoxicity and reproduction
toxicity after consumption of the dairy products from the 3 areas.

Copyright © 2020 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.fct.2020.111844 
PMID: 33152470 

