
1. J Invest Dermatol. 2020 Nov 11. pii: S0022-202X(20)32276-4. doi:
10.1016/j.jid.2020.10.016. [Epub ahead of print]

NLRP3 Inhibition Ameliorates Severe Cutaneous Autoimmune Manifestations in a
Mouse Model of Autoimmune Polyendocrinopathy-Candidiasis-Ectodermal
Dystrophy-Like Disease.

Zhu F(1), Willette-Brown J(1), Zhang J(2), Ferre EMN(3), Sun Z(4), Wu X(4),
Lionakis MS(3), Hu Y(5).

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Cancer Immunometabolism, Center for Cancer Research, National
Cancer Institute, National Institutes of Health, Frederick, Maryland, USA.
(2)Laboratory of Cancer Immunometabolism, Center for Cancer Research, National
Cancer Institute, National Institutes of Health, Frederick, Maryland, USA;
Department of Ophthalmology, Shanghai General Hospital, School of Medicine,
Shanghai Jiao Tong University, Shanghai, China; Shanghai Key Laboratory of Ocular
Fundus Diseases, Shanghai General Hospital, Shanghai Jiao Tong University,
Shanghai, China; Shanghai Engineering Center for Visual Science and
Photomedicine, Shanghai, China; National Clinical Research Center for Eye
Diseases, Shanghai, China; Shanghai Engineering Center for Precise Diagnosis and 
Treatment of Eye Diseases, Shanghai, China.
(3)Fungal Pathogenesis Section, Laboratory of Clinical Immunology and
Microbiology, National Institute of Allergy and Infectious Diseases, Bethesda,
Maryland, USA.
(4)Cancer Research Technology Program, Frederick National Laboratory for Cancer
Research, Frederick, Maryland, USA.
(5)Laboratory of Cancer Immunometabolism, Center for Cancer Research, National
Cancer Institute, National Institutes of Health, Frederick, Maryland, USA.
Electronic address: huy2@mail.nih.gov.

Patients with autoimmune polyendocrinopathy-candidiasis-ectodermal dystrophy show
diverse endocrine and nonendocrine manifestations initiated by self-reactive T
cells because of AIRE mutation-induced defective central tolerance. A large
number of American patients with autoimmune
polyendocrinopathy-candidiasis-ectodermal dystrophy suffer from early-onset
cutaneous inflammatory lesions accompanied by an infiltration of T cells and
myeloid cells. The role of myeloid cells in this setting remains to be fully
investigated. In this study, we characterize the autoinflammatory phenotypes in
the skin of both autoimmune polyendocrinopathy-candidiasis-ectodermal
dystrophy-like kinase-dead Ikkα knockin mice and patients with autoimmune
polyendocrinopathy-candidiasis-ectodermal dystrophy. We found a marked
infiltration of autoreactive CD4 T cells, macrophages, and neutrophils; elevated 
uric acid; and increased NLRP3, a major inflammasome component. Depleting
autoreactive CD4 T cells or ablating Ccl2/Cxcr2 genes significantly attenuated
the inflammasome activity, inflammation, and skin phenotypes in kinase-dead Ikkα 
knockin mice. Importantly, treatment with an NLRP3 inhibitor reduced skin
phenotypes and decreased infiltration of CD4 T cells, macrophages, and
neutrophils. These results suggest that increased myeloid cell infiltration
contributes to autoreactive CD4 T cell-mediated skin autoinflammation. Thus, our 
findings reveal that the combined infiltration of macrophages and neutrophils is 
required for autoreactive CD4 T cell-mediated skin disease pathogenesis and that 
the NLRP3-dependent inflammasome is a potential therapeutic target for the
cutaneous manifestations of autoimmune diseases.

Published by Elsevier Inc.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jid.2020.10.016 
PMID: 33188780 

