
1. J Immunother Cancer. 2020 Nov;8(2). pii: e001583. doi: 10.1136/jitc-2020-001583.

Defining best practices for tissue procurement in immuno-oncology clinical
trials: consensus statement from the Society for Immunotherapy of Cancer Surgery 
Committee.

Gastman B(1), Agarwal PK(2), Berger A(3), Boland G(4), Broderick S(5)(6),
Butterfield LH(7)(8), Byrd D(9), Fecci PE(10), Ferris RL(11), Fong Y(12), Goff
SL(13), Grabowski MM(14), Ito F(15), Lim M(16), Lotze MT(17), Mahdi H(18), Malafa
M(19), Morris CD(20), Murthy P(21), Neves RI(22), Odunsi A(23), Pai SI(4),
Prabhakaran S(24), Rosenberg SA(25), Saoud R(26), Sethuraman J(27), Skitzki
J(28), Slingluff CL(29), Sondak VK(30), Sunwoo JB(31), Turcotte S(32), Yeung
CC(33), Kaufman HL(34)(35).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Plastic Surgery, Cleveland Clinic, Cleveland, Ohio, USA.
(2)Department of Surgery, University of Chicago, Chicago, Illinois, USA.
(3)Division of Surgical Oncology, Rutgers Cancer Institute of New Jersey, New
Brunswick, New Jersey, USA.
(4)Department of Surgical Oncology, Massachusetts General Hospital, Boston,
Massachusetts, USA.
(5)Oncology, Johns Hopkins Medicine Sidney Kimmel Comprehensive Cancer Center,
Baltimore, Maryland, USA.
(6)Department of Surgery, Johns Hopkins Medicine, Baltimore, Maryland, USA.
(7)Parker Institute for Cancer Immunotherapy, San Francisco, California, USA.
(8)Microbiology and Immunology, University of California San Francisco, San
Francisco, California, USA.
(9)Department of Surgery, University of Washington, Seattle, Washington, USA.
(10)Department of Neurosurgery, Duke University School of Medicine, Durham, North
Carolina, USA.
(11)Departments of Otolaryngology, Immunology, and Radiation Oncology, University
of Pittsburgh Hillman Cancer Center, Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania, USA.
(12)Department of Surgery, City of Hope National Medical Center, Duarte,
California, USA.
(13)NCI/SB, National Cancer Institute, Bethesda, Maryland, USA.
(14)Department of Neurosurgery, Duke Center for Brain and Spine Metastasis,
Durham, North Carolina, USA.
(15)Center for Immunotherapy, Department of Surgical Oncology, Roswell Park
Comprehensive Cancer Center, Buffalo, New York, USA.
(16)Departments of Neurosurgery, Oncology, Radiation Oncology, and
Otolaryngology, Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine, Baltimore, Maryland,
USA.
(17)Department of Surgery, University of Pittsburgh School of Medicine,
Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania, USA.
(18)OBGYN and Women's Health Institute, Cleveland Clinic, Cleveland, Ohio, USA.
(19)Department of Gastrointestinal Oncology, Moffitt Cancer Center, Tampa,
Florida, USA.
(20)Division of Orthopaedic Oncology, Johns Hopkins University, Baltimore,
Maryland, USA.
(21)Department of Surgery, UPMC Hillman Cancer Center, University of Pittsburgh, 
Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania, USA.
(22)Department of Surgery, Penn State Cancer Institute, Hershey, Pennsylvania,
USA.
(23)Departments of Immunology and Gynecologic Oncology, Roswell Park Cancer
Institute, Buffalo, New York, USA.
(24)Division of Surgical Oncology, Department of Surgery, UNM Comprehensive
Cancer Center, University of New Mexico, Albuquerque, New Mexico, USA.
(25)Surgery Branch, National Cancer Institute, Bethesda, Maryland, USA.
(26)Department of Surgery, University of Chicago Hospitals, Chicago, Illinois,
United States.
(27)Nurix Therapeutics Inc, San Francisco, California, USA.
(28)Departments of Surgical Oncology and Immunology, Roswell Park Comprehensive
Cancer Center, Buffalo, New York, USA.
(29)Department of Surgery, Division of Surgical Oncology, Breast and Melanoma
Surgery, University of Virginia, Charlottesville, Virginia, USA.
(30)Department of Cutaneous Oncology, Moffitt Cancer Center, Tampa, Florida, USA.
(31)Department of Otolaryngology, Stanford University School of Medicine,
Stanford, California, USA.
(32)Surgery Department, Centre Hospitalier de l'Universite de Montreal, Montreal,
Quebec, Canada.
(33)Department of Pathology, Fred Hutchinson Cancer Research Center, Seattle,
Washington, USA.
(34)Department of Surgical Oncology, Massachusetts General Hospital, Boston,
Massachusetts, USA HLKaufman@mgh.harvard.edu.
(35)Immuneering Corp, Cambridge, Massachusetts, USA.

Immunotherapy is now a cornerstone for cancer treatment, and much attention has
been placed on the identification of prognostic and predictive biomarkers. The
success of biomarker development is dependent on accurate and timely collection
of biospecimens and high-quality processing, storage and shipping. Tumors are
also increasingly used as source material for the generation of therapeutic T
cells. There have been few guidelines or consensus statements on how to optimally
collect and manage biospecimens and source material being used for immunotherapy 
and related research. The Society for Immunotherapy of Cancer Surgery Committee
has brought together surgical experts from multiple subspecialty disciplines to
identify best practices and to provide consensus on how best to access and manage
specific tissues for immuno-oncology treatments and clinical investigation. In
addition, the committee recommends early integration of surgeons and other
interventional physicians with expertise in biospecimen collection, especially in
clinical trials, to optimize the quality of tissue and the validity of
correlative clinical studies in cancer immunotherapy.

© Author(s) (or their employer(s)) 2020. Re-use permitted under CC BY-NC. No
commercial re-use. See rights and permissions. Published by BMJ.

DOI: 10.1136/jitc-2020-001583 
PMCID: PMC7670953
PMID: 33199512 

Conflict of interest statement: Competing interests: BG is a consultant for Quest
Imaging and a speaker for Castle Biosciences. PKA has partner salary from Pfizer.
GB has sponsored research agreements with Takeda Oncology, Olink Proteomics, and 
Palleon, honorarium from Novartis, and consulting for NW Biotherapeutics. SB is a
consultant for BMS. LHB is a consultant for StemImmune/Calidi, NextCure,
Replimmune, Western Oncolytics, Torque Therapeutics, Khloris, Pyxis, Cytomix, and
Roche-Genentech. PEF is a consultant for Monteris Medical. RLF is a consultant
for Aduro Biotech, Amgen, Astra-Zeneca/Medimmune, Bain Capital Life Sciences,
BMS, EMD Serono, GSK, Iovance, Lilly, MacroGenics, Merck, Nanobiotx, Numab
Therapeutics, Oncorus, Ono Pharmaceutcal Co., Pfizer, PPD, Regeneron, Tesaro,
Torque Therapeutics, TTMS, and VentiRx Pharmaceuticals; has contracted research
agreements with Astra-Zeneca/Medimmune, BMS, Merck, Tesaro, and TTMS, has partner
consulting for Janssen, Lilly, Scibase, DermTech, BMS, and Pfizer, and has
partner contracted research agreements with Regeneron, Janssen, BMS, Abbvie, BI, 
Castle Biosciences and Lilly.YF has relationships with Imagene, Merck, Eureka and
Surgamo, and partner interest in Pfizer. MLim is a consultant for Tocagen, VBI
and Strykes, and receives research funding from Arbor, BMS and Biohaven. MLotze
receives salary from Nurix, Inc., royalty from Cellatrope, has IP rights in
Intrexon, consults for Myst, Instill, Checkmate, Carisma and Surface Oncology,
and has ownership interest in iRepertoire. HM has contracted research with Puma
Biotechnology. RIN is a consultant for Novartis, Castle Biosciences, and
Sanofi-Granzyme and has contracted research with Regeneron and Castle
Biosciences. AO is a cofounder of Tactiva Therapeutics, Inc., and receives
research support from AstraZeneca and Tesaro. SP is a consultant for Abbvie,
Astra-Zeneca, Cue Biopharma, Fusion Biopharma, Merck, Newlink Genetics, Oncolys
Biopharma, Oncosec, Replimmune and Sensei Bio, contracted research with Abbvie,
Astra-Zeneca, Cue Biopharma, Sensei Bio and Tesaro, and investigator-initiated
trials with ASTX Pharmaceuticals, Astra-Zeneca, Cue Biopharma, ImmuneDesign and
Merck. SAR has patents held by the NCI and cooperative research agreements with
Kite, Iovance and Ziopharm. CLS is a consultant for Celldex, CureVac and Castle
Biosciences, and has institutional support from Celldex, Polynoma, GSK, Merck,
3M, Theraclion and Immatics. VKS is a consultant for Array, BMS, Merck, Novartis,
Pfizer, Polynoma, Regeneron and Replimmune. JBS is on the advisory board of ABL
Bio and is the scientific founder of Indapta Therapeutics. ST is a consultant for
TVM Life Science, received honoraria from Astra-Zeneca, Celgene and Exactis
Innovation, and has research grants from BMS and Iovance. CY is a consultant for 
Loxo, Merck and Adaptive Biotechnologies, has contracted research with Obi and
Pfizer, and has ownership interest in Molpath Dx, LLC. HLK is an employee of
Immuneering Coporation.

