
1. Nephrol Dial Transplant. 2021 Feb 20;36(3):452-464. doi: 10.1093/ndt/gfaa264.

High levels of gut-homing immunoglobulin A+ B lymphocytes support the pathogenic 
role of intestinal mucosal hyperresponsiveness in immunoglobulin A nephropathy
patients.

Sallustio F(1), Curci C(2)(3), Chaoul N(4), Fontò G(3), Lauriero G(3), Picerno
A(3), Divella C(3), Di Leo V(3), De Angelis M(5), Ben Mkaddem S(6), Macchia L(4),
Gallone A(2), Monteiro RC(6), Pesce F(3), Gesualdo L(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Interdisciplinary Medicine, University of Bari "Aldo Moro",
Bari, Italy.
(2)Department of Basic Medical Sciences, Neuroscience and Sense Organs,
University of Bari "Aldo Moro", Bari, Italy.
(3)Nephrology, Dialysis and Transplantation Unit, Department of Emergency and
Organ Transplantation, University "Aldo Moro", Bari, Italy.
(4)Allergology Unit, Department of Emergency and Organ Transplantation,
University "Aldo Moro", Bari, Italy.
(5)Department of Soil, Plant and Food Sciences, University of Bari Aldo Moro,
Bari, Italy.
(6)Faculty of Medicine, Center for Research on Inflammation, Paris Diderot
University, INSERM U1149, ELR8252 CNRS, Paris, France.

BACKGROUND: Immunoglobulin A nephropathy (IgAN) is the most frequent primary
glomerulonephritis. The role of the microbiota and mucosal immunity in the
pathogenesis of IgAN remains a key element. To date, the hypothetical
relationship between commensal bacteria, elevated tumour necrosis factor (TNF)
superfamily member 13 [also known as B-cell activating factor (BAFF)] levels,
perturbed homoeostasis of intestinal-activated B cells and intestinal IgA class
switch has not been clearly shown in IgAN patients.
METHODS: We studied the intestinal-renal axis connections, analysing levels of
BAFF, TNF ligand superfamily member 13 (APRIL) and intestinal-activated B cells
in IgAN patients, healthy subjects (HSs) and patients with non-IgA
glomerulonephritides.
RESULTS: IgAN patients had increased serum levels of BAFF cytokine, correlating
with higher amounts of five specific microbiota metabolites, and high APRIL
cytokine serum levels. We also found that subjects with IgAN have a higher level 
of circulating gut-homing (CCR9+ β7 integrin+) regultory B cells, memory B cells 
and IgA+ memory B cells compared with HSs. Finally, we found that IgAN patients
had high levels of both total plasmablasts (PBs) and intestinal-homing PBs.
Interestingly, PBs significantly increased in IgAN but not in patients with other
glomerulonephritides.
CONCLUSIONS: Our results demonstrate a significant difference in the amount of
intestinal-activated B lymphocytes between IgAN patients and HSs, confirming the 
hypothesis of the pathogenic role of intestinal mucosal hyperresponsiveness in
IgAN. The intestinal-renal axis plays a crucial role in IgAN and several factors 
may contribute to its complex pathogenesis and provide an important area of
research for novel targeted therapies to modulate progression of the disease.

© The Author(s) 2020. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of ERA-EDTA.

DOI: 10.1093/ndt/gfaa264 
PMCID: PMC7898021
PMID: 33200215 

