
1. Appl Environ Microbiol. 2021 Jan 15;87(3). pii: e02481-20. doi:
10.1128/AEM.02481-20. Print 2021 Jan 15.

The Entner-Doudoroff Pathway Is an Essential Metabolic Route for
Methylotuvimicrobium buryatense 5GB1C.

He L(1), Groom JD(2), Lidstrom ME(2)(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Chemical Engineering, University of Washington, Seattle,
Washington, USA lianhe@uw.edu.
(2)Department of Chemical Engineering, University of Washington, Seattle,
Washington, USA.
(3)Department of Microbiology, University of Washington, Seattle, Washington,
USA.

Methylotuvimicrobium buryatense 5GB1C, a fast-growing gammaproteobacterial
methanotroph, is equipped with two glycolytic pathways, the Entner-Doudoroff (ED)
pathway and the Embden-Meyerhof-Parnas (EMP) pathway. Metabolic flux analysis and
13C-labeling experiments have shown the EMP pathway is the principal glycolytic
route in M. buryatense 5GB1C, while the ED pathway appears to be metabolically
and energetically insignificant. However, it has not been possible to obtain a
null mutant in the edd-eda genes encoding the two unique enzymatic reactions in
the ED pathway, suggesting the ED pathway may be essential for M. buryatense
5GB1C growth. In this study, the inducible P BAD promoter was used to manipulate 
gene expression of edd-eda, and in addition, the expression of these two genes
was separated from that of a downstream gltA gene. The resulting strain shows
arabinose-dependent growth that correlates with ED pathway activity, with normal 
growth achieved in the presence of ∼0.1 g/liter arabinose. Flux balance analysis 
shows that M. buryatense 5GB1C with a strong ED pathway has a reduced energy
budget, thereby limiting the mutant growth at a high concentration of arabinose. 
Collectively, our study demonstrates that the ED pathway is essential for M.
buryatense 5GB1C. However, no known mechanism can directly explain the
essentiality of the ED pathway, and thus, it may have a yet unknown regulatory
role required for sustaining a healthy and functional metabolism in this
bacterium.IMPORTANCE The gammaproteobacterial methanotrophs possess a unique
central metabolic architecture where methane and other reduced C1 carbon sources 
are assimilated through the ribulose monophosphate cycle. Although efforts have
been made to better understand methanotrophic metabolism in these bacteria via
experimental and computational approaches, many questions remain unanswered. One 
of these is the essentiality of the ED pathway for M. buryatense 5GB1C, as
current results appear contradictory. By creating a construct with edd-eda and
gltA genes controlled by P BAD and P J23101 , respectively, we demonstrated the
essentiality of the ED pathway for this obligate methanotroph. It is also
demonstrated that these genetic tools are applicable to M. buryatense 5GB1C and
that expression of the target genes can be tightly controlled across an extensive
range. Our study adds to the expanding knowledge of methanotrophic metabolism and
practical approaches to genetic manipulation for obligate methanotrophs.

Copyright © 2021 American Society for Microbiology.

DOI: 10.1128/AEM.02481-20 
PMCID: PMC7848903 [Available on 2021-07-15]
PMID: 33218997  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

