
1. Biochem J. 2020 Nov 25. pii: BCJ20200631. doi: 10.1042/BCJ20200631. [Epub ahead
of print]

Interrogation of 3D-swapped structure and functional attributes of quintessential
Sortase A from Streptococcus pneumoniae.

Biswas T(1), Misra A(2), Das S(2), Yadav P(1), Ramakumar S(2), Roy R(1).

Author information: 
(1)National Institute of Immunology, Delhi, India.
(2)Indian Institute of Science, Bangalore, India.

The anchoring of the surface proteins to the cell wall in gram-positive bacteria 
involves a peptide ligation reaction catalyzed by transpeptidase sortase. Most
bacterial genomes encode multiple sortases with dedicated functions.
Streptococcus pneumoniae (Sp) carries four sortases; a housekeeping sortase
(SrtA), and three pilin specific sortases (SrtC1, C2, C3) dedicated to the
biosynthesis of covalent pilus. Interestingly, SrtA, meant for performing
housekeeping roles, is also implicated in pilus assembly of Sp. The allegiance of
SpSrtA to the pathogenic pilus assembly makes it an ideal target for clinical
inhibitor development. In this paper, we describe biochemical characterization,
crystal structure and peptide substrate preference of SpSrtA. Transpeptidation
reaction with a variety of substrates revealed that the enzyme preferred
elongated LPXTG sequences and transferred them equally well to both Ala- and
Gly-terminated peptides. Curiously, crystal structure of both wild type and an
active site (Cys to Ala) mutant of SpSrtA displayed inter-twined 3D-swapped
dimers in which each protomer generated a classic eight stranded beta-barrel
"sortase fold". Size-exclusion chromatography and sedimentation equilibrium
measurements revealed predominant presence of a dimer in equilibrium with its
monomer. The crystal structure-based Cys-Cys distance mapping with defined
chemical cross-linkers established the existence of 3D-swapped structure in
solution. The swapping in SpSrtA, unprecedented for sortase family, may be
physiologically relevant and meant to perform regulatory functions.

Copyright 2020 The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1042/BCJ20200631 
PMID: 33236758 

