
1. Mol Microbiol. 2020 Dec 7. doi: 10.1111/mmi.14663. [Epub ahead of print]

The Escherichia coli FadR transcription factor: Too much of a good thing?

Cronan JE(1).

Author information: 
(1)Departments of Microbiology and Biochemistry, University of Illinois, Urbana, 
IL, USA.

Escherichia coli FadR is a transcription factor regulated by acyl-CoA thioester
binding that optimizes fatty acid (FA) metabolism in response to environmental
FAs. FadR represses the fad genes of FA degradation (β-oxidation) and activates
the fab genes of FA synthesis thereby allowing E. coli to have its cake (acyl
chains for phospholipid synthesis) and eat it (degrade acyl chains to
acetyl-CoA). Acyl-CoA binding of FadR derepresses the transcription of the fad
genes and cancels fab gene transcriptional activation. Activation of fab genes
was thought restricted to the fabA and fabB genes of unsaturated FA synthesis,
but FadR overproduction markedly increases yields of all FA acyl chains.
Subsequently, almost all of the remaining fab genes were shown to be
transcriptionally activated by FadR binding, but binding was very weak. Why are
the low-affinity sites retained? What effects on cell physiology would result
from their conversion to high-affinity sites (thereby mimicking FadR
overproduction)? Investigations of E. coli cell size determinants showed that FA 
synthesis primarily determines E. coli cell size. Upon modest induction of FadR, 
cell size increases, but at the cost of growth rate and accumulation of
intracellular membranes. Greater induction resulted in further growth rate
decreases and abnormal cells. Hence, too much FadR is bad. FadR is
extraordinarily conserved in γ-proteobacteria but has migrated. Mycobacterium
tuberculosis encodes FadR orthologs one of which is functional in E. coli.
Strikingly, the FadR theme of acyl-CoA-dependent transcriptional regulation is
found in a different transcription factor family where two Bacillus species plus 
bacterial and archaeal thermophiles contain related proteins of similar function.

© 2020 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/mmi.14663 
PMID: 33283913 

