
1. Blood. 2020 Dec 10;136(24):2764-2773. doi: 10.1182/blood.2020006374.

MYC-induced human acute myeloid leukemia requires a continuing IL-3/GM-CSF
costimulus.

Bulaeva E(1)(2), Pellacani D(1), Nakamichi N(1), Hammond CA(1)(2), Beer PA(1)(3),
Lorzadeh A(4), Moksa M(4), Carles A(4), Bilenky M(5), Lefort S(1), Shu J(1),
Wilhelm BT(6)(7), Weng AP(1), Hirst M(4)(5), Eaves CJ(1)(2)(8).

Author information: 
(1)Terry Fox Laboratory, British Columbia Cancer Agency, Vancouver, BC, Canada.
(2)Department of Medicine, University of British Columbia, Vancouver, BC, Canada.
(3)Wellcome Sanger Institute, Hinxton, Cambridge, United Kingdom.
(4)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, Michael Smith Laboratories,
University of British Columbia, Vancouver, BC, Canada.
(5)Canada's Michael Smith Genome Sciences Centre, British Columbia Cancer Agency,
Vancouver, BC, Canada.
(6)Institute for Research in Immunology and Cancer, Montreal, QC, Canada.
(7)Department of Medicine, Faculty of Medicine, Université de Montréal, Montreal,
QC, Canada; and.
(8)Department of Medical Genetics, University of British Columbia, Vancouver, BC,
Canada.

Hematopoietic clones with leukemogenic mutations arise in healthy people as they 
age, but progression to acute myeloid leukemia (AML) is rare. Recent evidence
suggests that the microenvironment may play an important role in modulating human
AML population dynamics. To investigate this concept further, we examined the
combined and separate effects of an oncogene (c-MYC) and exposure to
interleukin-3 (IL-3), granulocyte-macrophage colony-stimulating factor (GM-CSF), 
and stem cell factor (SCF) on the experimental genesis of a human AML in
xenografted immunodeficient mice. Initial experiments showed that normal human
CD34+ blood cells transduced with a lentiviral MYC vector and then transplanted
into immunodeficient mice produced a hierarchically organized, rapidly fatal, and
serially transplantable blast population, phenotypically and transcriptionally
similar to human AML cells, but only in mice producing IL-3, GM-CSF, and SCF
transgenically or in regular mice in which the cells were exposed to IL-3 or
GM-CSF delivered using a cotransduction strategy. In their absence, the MYC+
human cells produced a normal repertoire of lymphoid and myeloid progeny in
transplanted mice for many months, but, on transfer to secondary mice producing
the human cytokines, the MYC+ cells rapidly generated AML. Indistinguishable
diseases were also obtained efficiently from both primitive (CD34+CD38-) and late
granulocyte-macrophage progenitor (GMP) cells. These findings underscore the
critical role that these cytokines can play in activating a malignant state in
normally differentiating human hematopoietic cells in which MYC expression has
been deregulated. They also introduce a robust experimental model of human
leukemogenesis to further elucidate key mechanisms involved and test strategies
to suppress them.

© 2020 by The American Society of Hematology.

DOI: 10.1182/blood.2020006374 
PMID: 33301029  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

