
1. Elife. 2020 Dec 11;9. pii: e58597. doi: 10.7554/eLife.58597.

The leukocyte non-coding RNA landscape in critically ill patients with sepsis.

Scicluna BP(1)(2), Uhel F(1), van Vught LA(1), Wiewel MA(1), Hoogendijk AJ(1),
Baessman I(3), Franitza M(3), Nürnberg P(3)(4), Horn J(5), Cremer OL(6), Bonten
MJ(7)(8), Schultz MJ(5), van der Poll T(1)(9); Molecular Diagnosis and Risk
Stratification in Sepsis (MARS) consortium.

Author information: 
(1)Amsterdam UMC, University of Amsterdam, Center for Experimental Molecular
Medicine, Amsterdam Infection & Immunity, Amsterdam, Netherlands.
(2)Amsterdam UMC, University of Amsterdam, Department of Clinical Epidemiology,
Biostatistics and Bioinformatics, Amsterdam, Netherlands.
(3)Cologne Center for Genomics, University of Cologne, Cologne, Germany.
(4)Center for Molecular Medicine Cologne, University of Cologne, Cologne,
Germany.
(5)Amsterdam UMC, University of Amsterdam, Department of Intensive Care Medicine,
Amsterdam, Netherlands.
(6)Department of Intensive Care, University Medical Center Utrecht, Utrecht,
Netherlands.
(7)Department of Medical Microbiology, University Medical Center Utrecht,
Utrecht, Netherlands.
(8)Julius Center for Health Sciences and Primary Care, University Medical Center 
Utrecht, Utrecht, Netherlands.
(9)Amsterdam UMC, University of Amsterdam, Division of Infectious Diseases,
Amsterdam, Netherlands.

The extent of non-coding RNA alterations in patients with sepsis and their
relationship to clinical characteristics, soluble mediators of the host response 
to infection, as well as an advocated in vivo model of acute systemic
inflammation is unknown. Here we obtained whole blood from 156 patients with
sepsis and 82 healthy subjects among whom eight were challenged with
lipopolysaccharide in a clinically controlled setting (human endotoxemia). Via
next-generation microarray analysis of leukocyte RNA we found that long
non-coding RNA and, to a lesser extent, small non-coding RNA were significantly
altered in sepsis relative to health. Long non-coding RNA expression, but not
small non-coding RNA, was largely recapitulated in human endotoxemia. Integrating
RNA profiles and plasma protein levels revealed known as well as previously
unobserved pathways, including non-sensory olfactory receptor activity. We
provide a benchmark dissection of the blood leukocyte 'regulome' that can
facilitate prioritization of future functional studies.

© 2020, Scicluna et al.

DOI: 10.7554/eLife.58597 
PMCID: PMC7775110
PMID: 33305733  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: BS, FU, Lv, MW, AH, IB, MF, PN, JH, OC, MB, MS,
Tv No competing interests declared

