
1. J Antimicrob Chemother. 2021 Jan 1;76(1):146-151. doi: 10.1093/jac/dkaa413.

Development and validation of a lateral flow immunoassay for rapid detection of
VanA-producing enterococci.

Oueslati S(1)(2), Volland H(3), Cattoir V(4), Bernabeu S(1)(2), Girlich D(1),
Dulac D(3), Plaisance M(3), Laroche M(5), Dortet L(1)(2)(6), Simon S(3), Naas
T(1)(2)(6).

Author information: 
(1)Team ReSIST, INSERM U1184, School of Medicine, Université Paris-Saclay, LabEx 
LERMIT, Le Kremlin-Bicêtre, France.
(2)Bacteriology-Hygiene Unit, Assistance Publique/Hôpitaux de Paris, Bicêtre
Hospital, Le Kremlin-Bicêtre, France.
(3)Université Paris-Saclay, CEA, INRAE, Département Médicaments et Technologies
pour la Santé, 91191 Gif-sur-Yvette, France.
(4)Department of Clinical Microbiology and French National Reference Centre for
Antibiotic Resistance: Glycopeptide-Resistant Enterococci, University Hospital,
Rennes, France.
(5)Research and Development Department, NG Biotech, Guipry, France.
(6)French National Reference Centre for Antibiotic Resistance:
Carbapenemase-Producing Enterobacteriaceae, Le Kremlin-Bicêtre, France.

BACKGROUND: VRE are nosocomial pathogens with an increasing incidence in recent
decades. Rapid detection is crucial to reduce their spread and prevent infections
and outbreaks.
OBJECTIVES: To evaluate a lateral flow immunoassay (LFIA) (called NG-Test VanA)
for the rapid and reliable detection of VanA-producing VRE (VanA-VRE) from
colonies and broth.
METHODS: NG-Test VanA was validated on 135 well-characterized enterococcal
isolates grown on Mueller-Hinton (MH) agar (including 40 VanA-VRE). Different
agar plates and culture broths widely used in routine laboratories for culture of
enterococci were tested.
RESULTS: All 40 VanA-VRE clinical isolates were correctly detected in less than
15 min irrespective of the species expressing the VanA ligase and the medium used
for bacterial growth. No cross-reaction was observed with any other clinically
relevant ligases (VanB, C1, C2, D, E, G, L, M and N). Overall, the sensitivity
and specificity of the assay were 100% for VanA-VRE grown on MH agar plates.
NG-Test VanA accurately detects VanA-VRE irrespective of the culture medium (agar
and broth). Band intensity was increased when using bacteria grown on
vancomycin-containing culture media or on MH close to the vancomycin disc as a
consequence of VanA induction. The limit of detection of the assay was 6.3 × 106 
cfu per test with bacteria grown on MH plates and 4.9 × 105 cfu per test with
bacteria grown on ChromID® VRE plates.
CONCLUSIONS: NG-Test VanA is efficient, rapid and easy to implement in the
routine workflow of a clinical microbiology laboratory for the confirmation of
VanA-VRE.

© The Author(s) 2020. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the
British Society for Antimicrobial Chemotherapy. All rights reserved. For
permissions, please email: journals.permissions@oup.com.

DOI: 10.1093/jac/dkaa413 
PMID: 33305802 

