
1. J Wound Care. 2020 Dec 2;29(12):720-726. doi: 10.12968/jowc.2020.29.12.720.

Therapeutic index for local infections score (TILI): a new diagnostic tool.

Dissemond J(1), Gerber V(2), Lobmann R(3), Kramer A(4), Mastronicola D(5),
Senneville E(6), Moisan C(7), Edwards-Jones V(8), Mahoney K(9), Junka A(10),
Bartoszewicz M(10), Verdú-Soriano J(11), Strohal R(12).

Author information: 
(1)Department for Dermatology, Venerology and Allergology, University School of
Medicine, Essen, Germany.
(2)ICW (Initiative Chronische Wunden) e.V., Quedlinburg, Germany.
(3)Department for Endocrinology, Diabetology and Geriatrics, Klinikum Stuttgart -
Bad Cannstatt, Germany.
(4)Institute of Hygiene and Environmental Medicine, University Medicine
Greifswald, Germany.
(5)Outpatient Wound Care Centre, Local Health Care System Frosinone, Frosinone,
Italy.
(6)Department of Infectious Diseases, Tourcoing Hospital, France.
(7)Department of Vascular and Endocrinology Surgery, Hopital Yves Le Foll
St-Brieuc, France.
(8)Department of Medical Microbiology, Manchester Metropolitan University, UK.
(9)Department of Wound Healing, Welsh Wounds Innovation Centre, Primary,
Community and Intermediate Care Division, Rhondda Cynon Taf, UK.
(10)Department of Pharmaceutical Microbiology and Parasitology, Wroclaw Medical
University, Poland.
(11)Department of Community Nursing, Preventive Medicine, Public Health and
History of Science, Faculty of Health Sciences, University of Alicante, Alicante,
Spain.
(12)Department of Dermatology and Venerology, Federal Academic Teaching Hospital,
Feldkirch, Austria.

OBJECTIVE: Local wound infections are a major challenge for patients and health
professionals. Various diagnostic and therapeutic options are available. However,
a generally accepted standard is still lacking in Europe. The aim was to develop 
an easy-to-use clinical score for the early detection of local wound infections, 
as a basis for decision-making on antiseptic therapy or decolonisation.
METHOD: An interdisciplinary and interprofessional panel of experts from seven
European countries was brought together to discuss the various aspects of
diagnosing local wound infections.
RESULTS: The result was the adoption of the Therapeutic Index for Local
Infections (TILI) score, developed in Germany by Initiative Chronische Wunden
e.V., specifically for health professionals not specialised in wound care.
Available in six European languages, the TILI score could also be adapted for
different European countries, depending on their specific national healthcare
requirements. The six clinical criteria for local wound infection are erythema to
surrounding skin; heat; oedema, induration or swelling; spontaneous pain or
pressure pain; stalled wound healing; and increase and/or change in colour or
smell of exudate. Meeting all criteria indicates that antiseptic wound therapy
could be started. Regardless of these unspecific clinical signs, there are also
health conditions for the clinical situation which are a direct indication for
antimicrobial wound therapy. These include the presence of wound pathogens, such 
as meticillin-resistant Staphylococcus aureus, septic surgical wound or the
presence of free pus.
CONCLUSION: The development of the new internationally adapted TILI score, which 
could also be used by any caregiver in daily practice to diagnose local
infections in acute and hard-to-heal wounds, is the result of expert consensus.
However, the score system has to be validated through a clinical evaluation. This
is to be performed in expert centres throughout Europe.

DOI: 10.12968/jowc.2020.29.12.720 
PMID: 33320745 

