
1. Ann Glob Health. 2020 Dec 3;86(1):151. doi: 10.5334/aogh.2831.

Human Health and Ocean Pollution.

Landrigan PJ(1), Stegeman JJ(2), Fleming LE(3)(4), Allemand D(5), Anderson DM(2),
Backer LC(6), Brucker-Davis F(7)(8), Chevalier N(7)(8), Corra L(9)(10), Czerucka 
D(5), Bottein MD(11)(12)(13), Demeneix B(14)(15), Depledge M(4), Deheyn DD(16),
Dorman CJ(17), Fénichel P(7)(8), Fisher S(1), Gaill F(14), Galgani F(18), Gaze
WH(19), Giuliano L(20), Grandjean P(21), Hahn ME(2), Hamdoun A(22), Hess P(18),
Judson B(1), Laborde A(23), McGlade J(24)(25), Mu J(1), Mustapha A(26)(27), Neira
M(28), Noble RT(29), Pedrotti ML(14)(30), Reddy C(31), Rocklöv J(32), Scharler
UM(33), Shanmugam H(1), Taghian G(1), van de Water JAJM(5), Vezzulli L(34), Weihe
P(35), Zeka A(36), Raps H(5)(37), Rampal P(5)(37).

Author information: 
(1)Boston College, US.
(2)Woods Hole Center for Oceans and Human Health, Woods Hole Oceanographic
Institution, US.
(3)European Centre for Environment and Human Health, GB.
(4)University of Exeter Medical School, GB.
(5)Centre Scientifique de Monaco, MC.
(6)Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, US.
(7)Université Côte d'Azur, FR.
(8)Centre Hospitalier Universitaire de Nice, Inserm, C3M, FR.
(9)International Society of Doctors for the Environment (ISDE), CH.
(10)Health and Environment of the Global Alliance on Health and Pollution (GAHP),
AR.
(11)Intergovernmental Oceanographic Commission of UNESCO, FR.
(12)IOC Science and Communication Centre on Harmful Algae, University of
Copenhagen, DK.
(13)Ecotoxicologie et développement durable expertise ECODD, Valbonne, FR.
(14)Centre National de la Recherche Scientifique, FR.
(15)Muséum National d'Histoire Naturelle, Paris, FR.
(16)Scripps Institution of Oceanography, University of California San Diego, US.
(17)Trinity College Dublin, IE.
(18)Institut Français de Recherche pour l'Exploitation des Mers, FR.
(19)University of Exeter, GB.
(20)CIESM The Mediterranean Science Commission, MC.
(21)Harvard University T.H. Chan School of Public Health, US.
(22)University of California at San Diego, US.
(23)Universidad de la República, UY.
(24)Institute for Global Prosperity, University College London, GB.
(25)Strathmore University Business School, Nairobi, KE.
(26)Nigerian Institute for Medical Research, Lagos, NG.
(27)Imperial College London, GB.
(28)World Health Organization, CH.
(29)University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill, US.
(30)Sorbonne Université, FR.
(31)Department of Marine Chemistry and Geochemistry, Woods Hole Oceanographic
Institution, US.
(32)Department of Public Health and Clinical Medicine, Section of Sustainable
Health, Umeå University, Umeå, SE.
(33)University of KwaZulu-Natal, ZA.
(34)University of Genoa, IT.
(35)University of the Faroe Islands and Department of Occupational Medicine and
Public Health, FO.
(36)Brunel University London, GB.
(37)WHO Collaborating Centre for Health and Sustainable Development, MC.

Background: Pollution - unwanted waste released to air, water, and land by human 
activity - is the largest environmental cause of disease in the world today. It
is responsible for an estimated nine million premature deaths per year, enormous 
economic losses, erosion of human capital, and degradation of ecosystems. Ocean
pollution is an important, but insufficiently recognized and inadequately
controlled component of global pollution. It poses serious threats to human
health and well-being. The nature and magnitude of these impacts are only
beginning to be understood.
Goals: (1) Broadly examine the known and potential impacts of ocean pollution on 
human health. (2) Inform policy makers, government leaders, international
organizations, civil society, and the global public of these threats. (3) Propose
priorities for interventions to control and prevent pollution of the seas and
safeguard human health.
Methods: Topic-focused reviews that examine the effects of ocean pollution on
human health, identify gaps in knowledge, project future trends, and offer
evidence-based guidance for effective intervention.
Environmental Findings: Pollution of the oceans is widespread, worsening, and in 
most countries poorly controlled. It is a complex mixture of toxic metals,
plastics, manufactured chemicals, petroleum, urban and industrial wastes,
pesticides, fertilizers, pharmaceutical chemicals, agricultural runoff, and
sewage. More than 80% arises from land-based sources. It reaches the oceans
through rivers, runoff, atmospheric deposition and direct discharges. It is often
heaviest near the coasts and most highly concentrated along the coasts of low-
and middle-income countries. Plastic is a rapidly increasing and highly visible
component of ocean pollution, and an estimated 10 million metric tons of plastic 
waste enter the seas each year. Mercury is the metal pollutant of greatest
concern in the oceans; it is released from two main sources - coal combustion and
small-scale gold mining. Global spread of industrialized agriculture with
increasing use of chemical fertilizer leads to extension of Harmful Algal Blooms 
(HABs) to previously unaffected regions. Chemical pollutants are ubiquitous and
contaminate seas and marine organisms from the high Arctic to the abyssal depths.
Ecosystem Findings: Ocean pollution has multiple negative impacts on marine
ecosystems, and these impacts are exacerbated by global climate change.
Petroleum-based pollutants reduce photosynthesis in marine microorganisms that
generate oxygen. Increasing absorption of carbon dioxide into the seas causes
ocean acidification, which destroys coral reefs, impairs shellfish development,
dissolves calcium-containing microorganisms at the base of the marine food web,
and increases the toxicity of some pollutants. Plastic pollution threatens marine
mammals, fish, and seabirds and accumulates in large mid-ocean gyres. It breaks
down into microplastic and nanoplastic particles containing multiple manufactured
chemicals that can enter the tissues of marine organisms, including species
consumed by humans. Industrial releases, runoff, and sewage increase frequency
and severity of HABs, bacterial pollution, and anti-microbial resistance.
Pollution and sea surface warming are triggering poleward migration of dangerous 
pathogens such as the Vibrio species. Industrial discharges, pharmaceutical
wastes, pesticides, and sewage contribute to global declines in fish stocks.
Human Health Findings: Methylmercury and PCBs are the ocean pollutants whose
human health effects are best understood. Exposures of infants in utero to these 
pollutants through maternal consumption of contaminated seafood can damage
developing brains, reduce IQ and increase children's risks for autism, ADHD and
learning disorders. Adult exposures to methylmercury increase risks for
cardiovascular disease and dementia. Manufactured chemicals - phthalates,
bisphenol A, flame retardants, and perfluorinated chemicals, many of them
released into the seas from plastic waste - can disrupt endocrine signaling,
reduce male fertility, damage the nervous system, and increase risk of cancer.
HABs produce potent toxins that accumulate in fish and shellfish. When ingested, 
these toxins can cause severe neurological impairment and rapid death. HAB toxins
can also become airborne and cause respiratory disease. Pathogenic marine
bacteria cause gastrointestinal diseases and deep wound infections. With climate 
change and increasing pollution, risk is high that Vibrio infections, including
cholera, will increase in frequency and extend to new areas. All of the health
impacts of ocean pollution fall disproportionately on vulnerable populations in
the Global South - environmental injustice on a planetary scale.
Conclusions: Ocean pollution is a global problem. It arises from multiple sources
and crosses national boundaries. It is the consequence of reckless, shortsighted,
and unsustainable exploitation of the earth's resources. It endangers marine
ecosystems. It impedes the production of atmospheric oxygen. Its threats to human
health are great and growing, but still incompletely understood. Its economic
costs are only beginning to be counted.Ocean pollution can be prevented. Like all
forms of pollution, ocean pollution can be controlled by deploying data-driven
strategies based on law, policy, technology, and enforcement that target priority
pollution sources. Many countries have used these tools to control air and water 
pollution and are now applying them to ocean pollution. Successes achieved to
date demonstrate that broader control is feasible. Heavily polluted harbors have 
been cleaned, estuaries rejuvenated, and coral reefs restored.Prevention of ocean
pollution creates many benefits. It boosts economies, increases tourism, helps
restore fisheries, and improves human health and well-being. It advances the
Sustainable Development Goals (SDG). These benefits will last for centuries.
Recommendations: World leaders who recognize the gravity of ocean pollution,
acknowledge its growing dangers, engage civil society and the global public, and 
take bold, evidence-based action to stop pollution at source will be critical to 
preventing ocean pollution and safeguarding human health.Prevention of pollution 
from land-based sources is key. Eliminating coal combustion and banning all uses 
of mercury will reduce mercury pollution. Bans on single-use plastic and better
management of plastic waste reduce plastic pollution. Bans on persistent organic 
pollutants (POPs) have reduced pollution by PCBs and DDT. Control of industrial
discharges, treatment of sewage, and reduced applications of fertilizers have
mitigated coastal pollution and are reducing frequency of HABs. National,
regional and international marine pollution control programs that are adequately 
funded and backed by strong enforcement have been shown to be effective. Robust
monitoring is essential to track progress.Further interventions that hold great
promise include wide-scale transition to renewable fuels; transition to a
circular economy that creates little waste and focuses on equity rather than on
endless growth; embracing the principles of green chemistry; and building
scientific capacity in all countries.Designation of Marine Protected Areas (MPAs)
will safeguard critical ecosystems, protect vulnerable fish stocks, and enhance
human health and well-being. Creation of MPAs is an important manifestation of
national and international commitment to protecting the health of the seas.

Copyright: © 2020 The Author(s).

DOI: 10.5334/aogh.2831 
PMCID: PMC7731724
PMID: 33354517 

Conflict of interest statement: All authors declare no Conflict of Interest in
regard to the work presented in this paper with the following exceptions. –
Author William H. Gaze declares no conflict of interest although he has received 
co-funding for PhD studentships from AstraZeneca.– Author Philippe Grandjean has 
provided paid expert assistance in legal cases involving populations exposed to
PFAS.– Author Barbara Demeneix is an inventor of “Transgenic clawed frog embryos 
and used as detectors of endocrine disruption in the environment”, a French
patent application filed in 2002 (n°FR0206669), that was extended through a PCT
application filled in 2003. Applicants: Centre National de la Recherche
Scientifique (CNRS) and Muséum National d’Histoire Naturelle (MNHN). Inventors:
B. Demeneix and N. Turque. The patent has been extended worldwide: France (2007),
Japan (2011), United States (2013), Canada (2013) and Europe (2015). There has
been no financial compensation for the patent.

