
1. Biomed Pharmacother. 2021 Jan;133:110954. doi: 10.1016/j.biopha.2020.110954. Epub
2020 Nov 29.

Anemarrhena asphodeloides modulates gut microbiota and restores pancreatic
function in diabetic rats.

Yan D(1), Fan P(2), Sun W(3), Ding Q(4), Zheng W(4), Xiao W(2), Zhang B(3), Zhang
T(5), Zhang T(2), Shi J(6), Chen X(4), Chen P(6), Zhang J(4), Hao Y(7), Sun X(4),
Pang X(4), Dong Y(8), Xu P(9), Yu L(10), Ma B(11).

Author information: 
(1)Beijing Institute of Radiation Medicine, Beijing, China; China Pharmaceutical 
Culture Collection, Institute of Medicinal Biotechnology, Chinese Academy of
Medical Sciences & Peking Union Medical College, Beijing, China.
(2)State Key Laboratory of Proteomics, Beijing Proteome Research Center, National
Center for Protein Sciences, Institute of Lifeomics, Beijing, China.
(3)School of Bioengineering, Dalian University of Technology, Dalian, China.
(4)Beijing Institute of Radiation Medicine, Beijing, China.
(5)China Pharmaceutical Culture Collection, Institute of Medicinal Biotechnology,
Chinese Academy of Medical Sciences & Peking Union Medical College, Beijing,
China.
(6)State Key Laboratory of Proteomics, Beijing Proteome Research Center, National
Center for Protein Sciences, Institute of Lifeomics, Beijing, China; Hebei
Province Key Lab of Research and Application on Microbial Diversity, College of
Life Sciences, Hebei University, Baoding, China.
(7)School of Life Sciences, Beijing University of Chinese Medicine, Beijing,
China.
(8)School of Bioengineering, Dalian University of Technology, Dalian, China.
Electronic address: yshdong@dlut.edu.cn.
(9)State Key Laboratory of Proteomics, Beijing Proteome Research Center, National
Center for Protein Sciences, Institute of Lifeomics, Beijing, China; Hebei
Province Key Lab of Research and Application on Microbial Diversity, College of
Life Sciences, Hebei University, Baoding, China. Electronic address:
xuping_bprc@126.com.
(10)China Pharmaceutical Culture Collection, Institute of Medicinal
Biotechnology, Chinese Academy of Medical Sciences & Peking Union Medical
College, Beijing, China. Electronic address: yly@cpcc.ac.cn.
(11)Beijing Institute of Radiation Medicine, Beijing, China. Electronic address: 
mabaiping@sina.com.

Anemarrhena asphodeloides is an herb widely used to treat symptoms associated
with diabetes in traditional Chinese medicine. However, its key components and
metabolites have low bioavailability and poor host absorption. To clarify the
anti-diabetic mechanism of A. asphodeloides extract (AAE), we examined the
anti-diabetic effects of AAE in rats with diabetes induced by a high-fat diet and
streptozotocin. Faeces levels of the main components and metabolites of AAE were 
significantly higher than levels in plasma, which indicated that gut microbiota
might play important roles in its anti-diabetic effect. Microbiological studies
showed that unabsorbed components increased the diversity of the gut microbiota, 
enriched potentially beneficial bacteria, and suppressed potentially harmful
bacteria. In vitro studies showed that AAE promoted the proliferation of Blautia 
coccoides, a bacterium with positive implication for diabetes, in a
dose-dependent manner. AAE also promoted pancreatic cell regeneration and
restored the function of pancreatic islet cells via peroxiredoxin 4
overexpression. Overall, these results suggest that AAE alleviates diabetes via
modulating gut microbiota and protein expression.

Copyright © 2020 The Author(s). Published by Elsevier Masson SAS.. All rights
reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.biopha.2020.110954 
PMID: 33378992  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

