
1. Toxicol Lett. 2021 Apr 1;340:77-88. doi: 10.1016/j.toxlet.2020.12.019. Epub 2021 
Jan 4.

Clinical implications of differential procoagulant toxicity of the palearctic
viperid genus Macrovipera, and the relative neutralization efficacy of antivenoms
and enzyme inhibitors.

Chowdhury A(1), Zdenek CN(2), Dobson JS(2), Bourke LA(2), Soria R(3), Fry BG(4).

Author information: 
(1)Toxin Evolution Lab, School of Biological Science, University of Queensland,
St. Lucia, QLD, 4072, Australia; Department of Biochemistry & Microbiology, North
South University, Dhaka, 1229, Bangladesh.
(2)Toxin Evolution Lab, School of Biological Science, University of Queensland,
St. Lucia, QLD, 4072, Australia.
(3)Inosan Biopharma, S.A. Arbea Campus Empresarial, Edificio 2, Planta 2,
Carretera Fuencarral a Alcobendas, Km 3.8, 28108, Madrid, Spain.
(4)Toxin Evolution Lab, School of Biological Science, University of Queensland,
St. Lucia, QLD, 4072, Australia. Electronic address: bgfry@uq.edu.au.

Species within the viperid genus Macrovipera are some of the most dangerous
snakes in the Eurasian region, injecting copious amounts of potent venom. Despite
their medical importance, the pathophysiological actions of their venoms have
been neglected. Particularly poorly known are the coagulotoxic effects and thus
the underlying mechanisms of lethal coagulopathy. In order to fill this knowledge
gap, we ascertained the effects of venom upon human plasma for Macrovipera
lebetina cernovi, M. l. lebetina, M. l. obtusa, M. l. turanica, and M. schweizeri
using diverse coagulation analysing protocols. All five were extremely potent in 
their ability to promote clotting but varied in their relative activation of
Factor X, being equipotent in this study to the venom of the better studied, and 
lethal, species Daboia russelii. The Insoserp European viper antivenom was shown 
to be highly effective against all the Macrovipera venoms, but performed poorly
against the D. russelii venom. Reciprocally, while Daboia antivenoms performed
well against D. russelii venom, they failed against Macrovipera venom. Thus
despite the two genera sharing a venom phenotype (Factor X activation) driven by 
the same toxin type (P-IIId snake venom metalloproteases), the surface
biochemistries of the toxins differed significantly enough to impede antivenom
cross- neutralization. The differences in venom biochemistry were reflected in
coagulation co-factor dependence. While both genera were absolutely dependent
upon calcium for the activation of Factor X, dependence upon phospholipid varied.
The Macrovipera venoms had low levels of dependence upon phospholipid while the
Daboia venom was three times more dependent upon phospholipid for the activation 
of Factor X. This suggests that the sites on the molecular surface responsible
for phospholipid dependence, are the same differential sites that prevent
inter-genera antivenom cross- neutralization. Due to cold-chain requirements,
antivenoms may not be stocked in rural settings where the need is at the
greatest. Thus we tested the efficacy of enzyme inhibitor Prinomastat as a
field-deployable treatment to stabilise patients while being transported to
antivenom stocks, and showed that it was extremely effective in blocking the
Factor X activating pathophysiological actions. Marimastat however was less
effective. These results thus not only shed light on the coagulopathic mechanisms
of Macrovipera venoms, but also provide data critical for evidence-based design
of snakebite management strategies.

Copyright © 2021 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.toxlet.2020.12.019 
PMID: 33412251  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of Competing Interest The authors
declare that they have no other known competing financial interests or personal
relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this
paper.’

