
1. Appl Environ Microbiol. 2021 Feb 26;87(6). pii: e02957-20. doi:
10.1128/AEM.02957-20. Print 2021 Feb 26.

Generation of Lactose- and Protease-Positive Probiotic Lacticaseibacillus
rhamnosus GG by Conjugation with Lactococcus lactis NCDO 712.

Hussain N(#)(1)(2)(3), Li R(#)(4), Takala TM(3), Tariq M(1)(2), Zaidi AH(1)(2),
Saris PEJ(4).

Author information: 
(1)National Probiotic Laboratory (HBD), National Institute for Biotechnology and 
Genetic Engineering (NIBGE), Faisalabad, Pakistan.
(2)Pakistan Institute of Engineering and Applied Sciences, Nilore, Islamabad,
Pakistan.
(3)Department of Microbiology, University of Helsinki, Helsinki, Finland.
(4)Department of Microbiology, University of Helsinki, Helsinki, Finland
ran.li@helsinki.fi per.saris@helsinki.fi.
(#)Contributed equally

Lacticaseibacillus rhamnosus GG (LGG) is the most studied probiotic bacterium in 
the world. It is used as a probiotic supplement in many foods, including various 
dairy products. However, LGG grows poorly in milk, as it neither metabolizes the 
main milk carbohydrate lactose nor degrades the major milk protein casein
effectively. In this study, we made L. rhamnosus GG lactose and protease positive
by conjugation with the dairy Lactococcus lactis strain NCDO 712 carrying the
lactose-protease plasmid pLP712. A lactose-hydrolyzing transconjugant colony was 
obtained on agar containing lactose as the sole source of carbohydrates. By
microscopic analysis and PCR with LGG- and pLP712-specific primers, the
transconjugant was confirmed to have originated from LGG and to carry the plasmid
pLP712. The transconjugant was named L. rhamnosus LAB49. The isolation of
plasmids revealed that not only pLP712 but also other plasmids had been
transferred from L. lactis into LGG during conjugation. With plasmid-specific PCR
primers, four additional lactococcal plasmids were detected in LAB49. Proteolytic
activity assay and SDS-PAGE analysis verified that L. rhamnosus LAB49 effectively
degraded β-casein. In contrast to its parental strain, LGG, the ability of LAB49 
to metabolize lactose and degrade casein enabled strong and fast growth in milk. 
As strains with new properties made by conjugation are not regarded as
genetically modified organisms (GMOs), L. rhamnosus LAB49 could be beneficial in 
dairy fermentations as a probiotic starter culture.IMPORTANCE Probiotic strain
Lacticaseibacillus rhamnosus GG (LGG) is widely sold on the market as a probiotic
or added as a supplement in dairy foods because of its benefits in human health. 
However, due to the deficiency of lactose and casein utilization, LGG does not
grow well in milk. On the other hand, lactose intolerance and cow's milk protein 
allergy are the two major problems related to milk consumption. One option to
help with these two conditions is the use of probiotic or lactose- and
casein-hydrolyzing bacteria in dairy products. The purpose of this study was to
equip LGG with lactose/casein-hydrolyzing ability by bacterial conjugation. As a 
result, we generated a non-GMO LGG derivative with improved properties and better
growth in milk.

Copyright © 2021 American Society for Microbiology.

DOI: 10.1128/AEM.02957-20 
PMID: 33419737  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

