
1. Free Radic Biol Med. 2021 Mar;165:368-384. doi:
10.1016/j.freeradbiomed.2021.01.013. Epub 2021 Jan 16.

Redox sensor NPGPx restrains ZAP70 activity and modulates T cell homeostasis.

Su FY(1), Huang SC(2), Wei PC(2), Hsu PH(3), Li JP(4), Su LW(2), Hsieh YL(2), Hu 
CM(2), Hsu JL(5), Yang CY(2), Chung CY(6), Shew JY(2), Lan JL(7), Sytwu HK(8),
Lee EY(9), Lee WH(10).

Author information: 
(1)Genomics Research Center, Academia Sinica, Taipei, Taiwan; Institute of
Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, National Yang-Ming University, Taipei,
Taiwan.
(2)Genomics Research Center, Academia Sinica, Taipei, Taiwan.
(3)Institute of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, National Yang-Ming
University, Taipei, Taiwan; Department of Bioscience and Biotechnology, National 
Taiwan Ocean University, Keelung, Taiwan.
(4)Division of Rheumatology and Immunology and Department of Internal Medicine,
China Medical University Hospital, Taichung, Taiwan; School of Chinese Medicine, 
China Medical University, Taichung, Taiwan.
(5)Graduate Institute of Biomedical Sciences, China Medical University, Taichung,
Taiwan; Drug Development Research Center, China Medical University, Taichung,
Taiwan.
(6)Institute of Biomedical Sciences, Academia Sinica, Taipei, Taiwan.
(7)Division of Rheumatology and Immunology and Department of Internal Medicine,
China Medical University Hospital, Taichung, Taiwan.
(8)Department and Graduate Institute of Microbiology and Immunology, National
Defense Medical Center, Taipei, Taiwan; National Institute of Infectious Diseases
and Vaccinology, National Health Research Institutes, Zhunan, Taiwan.
(9)Department of Biological Chemistry, University of California, Irvine, Irvine, 
CA, USA.
(10)Genomics Research Center, Academia Sinica, Taipei, Taiwan; Drug Development
Research Center, China Medical University, Taichung, Taiwan; Department of
Biological Chemistry, University of California, Irvine, Irvine, CA, USA.
Electronic address: whlee@uci.edu.

Emerging evidences implicate the contribution of ROS to T cell activation and
signaling. The tyrosine kinase, ζ-chain-associated protein of 70 kDa (ZAP70), is 
essential for T cell development and activation. However, it remains elusive
whether a direct redox regulation affects ZAP70 activity upon TCR stimulation.
Here, we show that deficiency of non-selenocysteine containing phospholipid
hydroperoxide glutathione peroxidase (NPGPx), a redox sensor, results in T cell
hyperproliferation and elevated cytokine productions. T cell-specific
NPGPx-knockout mice reveal enhanced T-dependent humoral responses and are
susceptible to experimental autoimmune encephalomyelitis (EAE). Through proteomic
approaches, ZAP70 is identified as the key interacting protein of NPGPx through
disulfide bonding. NPGPx is activated by ROS generated from TCR stimulation, and 
modulates ZAP70 activity through redox switching to reduce ZAP70 recruitment to
TCR/CD3 complex in membrane lipid raft, therefore subduing TCR responses. These
results reveal a delicate redox mechanism that NPGPx serves as a modulator to
curb ZAP70 functions in maintaining T cell homeostasis.

Copyright © 2021 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.freeradbiomed.2021.01.013 
PMID: 33460768 

