
1. Anim Microbiome. 2020 Nov 2;2(1):40. doi: 10.1186/s42523-020-00059-z.

Breeding farm, level of feeding and presence of antibiotics in the feed influence
rabbit cecal microbiota.

Velasco-Galilea M(1), Guivernau M(2), Piles M(3), Viñas M(2), Rafel O(3), Sánchez
A(4)(5), Ramayo-Caldas Y(3), González-Rodríguez O(3), Sánchez JP(3).

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Agrifood Research and Technology (IRTA) - Animal Breeding and
Genetics, E08140 Caldes de Montbui, Barcelona, Spain. maria.velasco@irta.es.
(2)Institute of Agrifood Research and Technology (IRTA) - Integral Management of 
Organic Waste, E08140 Caldes de Montbui, Barcelona, Spain.
(3)Institute of Agrifood Research and Technology (IRTA) - Animal Breeding and
Genetics, E08140 Caldes de Montbui, Barcelona, Spain.
(4)Animal Genomics Group, Centre for Research in Agricultural Genomics (CRAG)
CSIC-IRTA-UAB-UB, Campus UAB, Catalonia, Spain.
(5)Unit of Animal Science, Department of Animal and Food Science, Autonomous
University of Barcelona, Barcelona, Spain.

BACKGROUND: The effect of the production environment and different management
practices in rabbit cecal microbiota remains poorly understood. While previous
studies have proved the impact of the age or the feed composition, research in
the breeding farm and other animal management aspects, such as the presence of
antibiotics in the feed or the level of feeding, is still needed.
Characterization of microbial diversity and composition of growing rabbits raised
under different conditions could help better understand the role these practices 
play in cecal microbial communities and how it may result in different animal
performance.
RESULTS: Four hundred twenty-five meat rabbits raised in two different
facilities, fed under two feeding regimes (ad libitum or restricted) with feed
supplemented or free of antibiotics, were selected for this study. A 16S rRNA
gene-based assessment through the MiSeq Illumina sequencing platform was
performed on cecal samples collected from these individuals at slaughter.
Different univariate and multivariate approaches were conducted to unravel the
influence of the different factors on microbial alpha diversity and composition
at phylum, genus and OTU taxonomic levels. The animals raised in the facility
harboring the most stable environmental conditions had greater, and less
variable, microbial richness and diversity. Bootstrap univariate analyses of
variance and sparse partial least squares-discriminant analyses endorsed that
farm conditions exerted an important influence on rabbit microbiota since the
relative abundances of many taxa were found differentially represented between
both facilities at all taxonomic levels characterized. Furthermore, only five
OTUs were needed to achieve a perfect classification of samples according to the 
facility where animals were raised. The level of feeding and the presence of
antibiotics did not modify the global alpha diversity but had an impact on some
bacteria relative abundances, albeit in a small number of taxa compared with
farm, which is consistent with the lower sample classification power according to
these factors achieved using microbial information.
CONCLUSIONS: This study reveals that factors associated with the farm effect and 
other management factors, such as the presence of antibiotics in the diet or the 
feeding level, modify cecal microbial communities. It highlights the importance
of offering a controlled breeding environment that reduces differences in
microbial cecal composition that could be responsible for different animal
performance.

DOI: 10.1186/s42523-020-00059-z 
PMCID: PMC7807820
PMID: 33499975 

