
1. Anim Microbiome. 2020 Sep 29;2(1):36. doi: 10.1186/s42523-020-00054-4.

Microbial co-occurrence networks of gut microbiota reveal community conservation 
and diet-associated shifts in cichlid fishes.

Riera JL(1), Baldo L(2)(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Evolutionary Biology, Ecology and Environmental Sciences,
University of Barcelona, Barcelona, Spain.
(2)Department of Evolutionary Biology, Ecology and Environmental Sciences,
University of Barcelona, Barcelona, Spain. baldo.laura@ub.edu.
(3)Institute for Research on Biodiversity (IRBio), University of Barcelona,
Barcelona, Spain. baldo.laura@ub.edu.

BACKGROUND: The extent to which deterministic rather than stochastic processes
guide gut bacteria co-existence and ultimately their assembling into a community 
remains largely unknown. Co-occurrence networks of bacterial associations offer a
powerful approach to begin exploring gut microbial community structure,
maintenance and dynamics, beyond compositional aspects alone. Here we used an
iconic model system, the cichlid fishes, with their multiple lake assemblages and
extraordinary ecological diversity, to investigate a) patterns of microbial
associations that were robust to major phylogeographical variables, and b)
changes in microbial network structure along dietary shifts. We tackled these
objectives using the large gut microbiota sequencing dataset available (nine
lakes from Africa and America), building geographical and diet-specific networks 
and performing comparative network analyses.
RESULTS: Major findings indicated that lake and continental microbial networks
were highly resembling in global topology and node taxonomic composition, despite
the heterogeneity of the samples. A small fraction of the observed co-occurrences
among operational taxonomic units (OTUs) was conserved across all lake
assemblages. These were all positive associations and involved OTUs within the
genera Cetobacterium and Turicibacter and several OTUs belonging to the families 
of Peptostreptococcaceae and Clostridiaceae (order Clostridiales). Mapping of
diet contribution on the African Lake Tanganyika network (therefore excluding the
geographic variable) revealed a clear community change from carnivores (C) to
omnivores (O) to herbivores (H). Node abundances and effect size for pairwise
comparisons between diets supported a strong contrasting pattern between C and H.
Moreover, diet-associated nodes in H formed complex modules of positive
interactions among taxonomically diverse bacteria (mostly Verrucomicrobia and
Proteobacteria).
CONCLUSIONS: Conservation of microbial network topologies and specific bacterial 
associations across distinct lake assemblages point to a major host-associated
effect and potential deterministic processes shaping the cichlid gut microbiota. 
While the origin and biological relevance of these common associations remain
unclear, their persistence suggests an important functional role in the cichlid
gut. Among the very diverse cichlids of L. Tanganyika, diet nonetheless
represents a major driver of microbial community changes. By intersecting results
from predictive network inferences and experimental trials, future studies will
be directed to explore the strength of these associations, predict the outcome of
community alterations driven by diet and ultimately help understanding the role
of gut microbiota in cichlid trophic diversification.

DOI: 10.1186/s42523-020-00054-4 
PMCID: PMC7807433
PMID: 33499972 

