
1. Blood Adv. 2021 Jan 26;5(2):549-564. doi: 10.1182/bloodadvances.2020002442.

Neutrophil specific granule and NETosis defects in gray platelet syndrome.

Aarts CEM(1), Downes K(2)(3), Hoogendijk AJ(1), Sprenkeler EGG(1)(4), Gazendam
RP(1), Favier R(5)(6), Favier M(5)(6), Tool ATJ(1), van Hamme JL(1), Kostadima
MA(2), Waller K(2), Zieger B(7), van Bergen MGJM(8), Langemeijer SMC(9), van der 
Reijden BA(8), Janssen H(10), van den Berg TK(1), van Bruggen R(1), Meijer AB(1),
Ouwehand WH(2)(3)(11), Kuijpers TW(1)(4).

Author information: 
(1)Sanquin Research and Landsteiner Laboratory, Amsterdam University Medical
Center, University of Amsterdam, The Netherlands.
(2)Department of Haematology, University of Cambridge, Cambridge Biomedical
Campus, Cambridge, United Kingdom.
(3)National Health Service Blood and Transplant, Cambridge Biomedical Campus,
Cambridge, United Kingdom.
(4)Emma Children's Hospital, Department of Pediatric Immunology, Rheumatology and
Infectious Disease, Amsterdam University Medical Center, University of Amsterdam,
Amsterdam, The Netherlands.
(5)Assistance Publique-Hôpitaux de Paris, Centre de Reference des Pathologies
Plaquettaires, Hôpitaux Armand Trousseau, Bicêtre, Robert Debré, Paris, France.
(6)INSERM Unité Mixte de Recherche (UMR) 1170, Gustave Roussy Cancer Campus,
Universite Paris-Saclay, Villejuif, France.
(7)Department of Pediatrics and Adolescent Medicine, University Medical Center,
Freiburg, Germany.
(8)Department of Laboratory Medicine, Laboratory of Hematology, Radboud Institute
of Molecular Life Sciences, Radboud University Medical Center, Nijmegen, The
Netherlands.
(9)Department of Hematology, Radboud University Medical Center, Nijmegen, The
Netherlands.
(10)Division of Cell Biology, Netherlands Cancer Institute, Amsterdam, The
Netherlands; and.
(11)Wellcome Sanger Institute, Wellcome Genome Campus, Hinxton, Cambridge, United
Kingdom.

Gray platelet syndrome (GPS) is an autosomal recessive bleeding disorder
characterized by a lack of α-granules in platelets and progressive myelofibrosis.
Rare loss-of-function variants in neurobeachin-like 2 (NBEAL2), a member of the
family of beige and Chédiak-Higashi (BEACH) genes, are causal of GPS. It is
suggested that BEACH domain containing proteins are involved in fusion, fission, 
and trafficking of vesicles and granules. Studies in knockout mice suggest that
NBEAL2 may control the formation and retention of granules in neutrophils. We
found that neutrophils obtained from the peripheral blood from 13 patients with
GPS have a normal distribution of azurophilic granules but show a deficiency of
specific granules (SGs), as confirmed by immunoelectron microscopy and mass
spectrometry proteomics analyses. CD34+ hematopoietic stem cells (HSCs) from
patients with GPS differentiated into mature neutrophils also lacked NBEAL2
expression but showed similar SG protein expression as control cells. This is
indicative of normal granulopoiesis in GPS and identifies NBEAL2 as a potentially
important regulator of granule release. Patient neutrophil functions, including
production of reactive oxygen species, chemotaxis, and killing of bacteria and
fungi, were intact. NETosis was absent in circulating GPS neutrophils. Lack of
NETosis is suggested to be independent of NBEAL2 expression but associated with
SG defects instead, as indicated by comparison with HSC-derived neutrophils.
Since patients with GPS do not excessively suffer from infections, the
consequence of the reduced SG content and lack of NETosis for innate immunity
remains to be explored.

© 2021 by The American Society of Hematology.

DOI: 10.1182/bloodadvances.2020002442 
PMCID: PMC7839360
PMID: 33496751 

