
1. Sheng Wu Gong Cheng Xue Bao. 2021 Jan 25;37(1):149-162. doi:
10.13345/j.cjb.200203.

[A review on polyhydroxyalkanoates synthesis in activated sludge system: the
effects of dissolved organic compounds by using anaerobic fermentation liquid
from waste activated sludge].

[Article in Chinese; Abstract available in Chinese from the publisher]

Dong J(1), Fang F(1), Zhang J(1), Xu R(1), Weng J(1), Cao J(1)(2).

Author information: 
(1)Key Laboratory of Integrates Regulation and Resource Development on Shallow
Lakes, Ministry of Education, College of Environment, Hohai University, Nanjing
210098, Jiangsu, China.
(2)Guohe Environmental Research Institute (Nanjing) Co., Ltd, Nanjing 210048,
Jiangsu, China.

Polyhydroxyalkanoates (PHA) synthesis by activated sludge using volatile fatty
acids (VFAs) in fermentation liquid of excess sludge as carbon source is a
hotspot in the field of environmental biotechnology. However, there is no unified
conclusion on the effects of non-VFAs, mainly dissolved organic matter (DOM), on 
PHA production. Thus, this critical review mainly introduces the main
characteristics and common analysis methods of DOM in anaerobic fermentation
liquid. The effects of DOM on PHA production are analyzed from the aspects of
microbiology, metabolic regulation and sludge properties. The results of
different studies showed that high concentration of DOM is bad for PHA
production, but an appropriate amount of DOM is conducive to the stability of
sludge properties, reducing the final PHA purification cost. Finally, suitable
strategies were proposed to regulate the PHA synthesis by activated sludge with
DOM for PHA production by anaerobic fermentation liquid.

Publisher: 利用活性污泥微生物将剩余污泥发酵液中的挥发性脂肪酸 (Volatile fatty acids，VFAs) 转化为聚羟基脂肪酸酯
(Polyhydroxyalkanoates，PHA) 是目前环境生物技术领域的研究热点。但针对发酵液中非VFAs物质 (主要是溶解性有机物，Dissolved 
organic matter，DOM)
对活性污泥合成PHA的影响目前仍未有统一的结论，需要进行较全面的分析和总结。因此，文中首先介绍了剩余污泥发酵液中DOM的主要特性及常见分析方法，然后从微生物学、代
谢调控、污泥性质等角度分析了DOM中几种主要组分 (多聚糖、蛋白类物质、腐殖质)
对活性污泥合成PHA的影响。综合各研究结果表明高浓度DOM不利于PHA的生产，但适量DOM的存在有利于污泥性质的稳定，同时能降低PHA提纯成本。最后提出了相应的策
略来实现对活性污泥利用DOM合成PHA的调控，以期为高效利用厌氧发酵液中DOM实现PHA合成提供解决思路。.
DOI: 10.13345/j.cjb.200203 
PMID: 33501797  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

