
1. Vaccine. 2021 Feb 22;39(8):1297-1302. doi: 10.1016/j.vaccine.2021.01.007. Epub
2021 Jan 25.

Increased serum bactericidal activity of autologous serum in C2 deficiency after 
vaccination against Haemophilus influenzae type b, and further support for an
MBL-dependent C2 bypass mechanism.

Jönsson G(1), Hansson C(2), Mellhammar L(3), Gullstrand B(4), Bengtsson AA(5),
Sahl C(6), Skattum L(7).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Clinical Sciences Lund, Section of Infection Medicine, Lund
University, and Skåne University Hospital, Lund, Sweden. Electronic address:
Goran.jonsson@med.lu.se.
(2)Clinical Immunology and Transfusion Medicine, Region Skåne, Lund, Sweden;
Department of Laboratory Medicine, Section of Microbiology, Immunology and
Glycobiology, Lund University, Lund, Sweden. Electronic address:
Christina.l.hansson@skane.se.
(3)Department of Clinical Sciences Lund, Section of Infection Medicine, Lund
University, and Skåne University Hospital, Lund, Sweden. Electronic address:
lisa.mellhammar@med.lu.se.
(4)Department of Clinical Sciences Lund, Section of Rheumatology, Lund
University, Lund, Sweden. Electronic address: birgitta.gullstrand@med.lu.se.
(5)Department of Clinical Sciences Lund, Section of Rheumatology, Lund
University, Lund, Sweden. Electronic address: anders.bengtsson@med.lu.se.
(6)Department of Laboratory Medicine, Section of Microbiology, Immunology and
Glycobiology, Lund University, Lund, Sweden. Electronic address:
cecilia.sahl@med.lu.se.
(7)Clinical Immunology and Transfusion Medicine, Region Skåne, Lund, Sweden;
Department of Laboratory Medicine, Section of Microbiology, Immunology and
Glycobiology, Lund University, Lund, Sweden. Electronic address:
lillemor_melander.skattum@med.lu.se.

Deficiencies of C2 and other components of the classical pathway of complement
are associated with increased risk of infections with encapsulated bacteria, such
as Haemophilus (H.) influenzae. Defense against H. influenzae is dependent on
specific antibodies and complement, which mediate serum bactericidal activity
(SBA) and opsonization. Due to lack of normal classical and lectin complement
pathway function in C2 deficiency (C2D), SBA would have to depend either on the
alternative pathway or on C2 bypass mechanisms. Here we studied SBA against H.
influenzae type b (Hib) before and after vaccination in a group of C2-deficient
persons, as the bactericidal capacity of antibodies in autologous complement in
relation to vaccination has not been investigated at group level in C2D. Sera
from 22 persons with C2D and 26 healthy controls were available. Out of these, 18
persons with C2D and all controls had been vaccinated with Act-HIB®. SBA against 
Hib bacteria was analyzed with autologous serum as the only complement source.
Antibodies to Hib capsular polysaccharide had been analyzed previously.
Concentrations of mannose-binding lectin (MBL) and other complement components
were measured in serum. SBA of both C2-deficient persons and controls was
significantly more efficient after vaccination (p = 0.002 and p < 0.0001,
respectively). After vaccination, all but two C2-deficient sera and one control
serum showed sufficient SBA (<50% surviving bacteria). Before vaccination, SBA of
C2-deficient sera was negatively correlated to serum concentrations of MBL (lower
proportion of surviving bacteria with higher MBL concentration; r = -0.55,
p = 0.008). After vaccination, SBA of C2-deficient sera was negatively correlated
to serum concentrations of IgG Hib antibodies (r = -0.56, p = 0.01). In
conclusion, SBA against Hib in autologous serum is increased after vaccination in
persons with C2D. In unvaccinated C2-deficient persons SBA was correlated to MBL 
concentration, providing further support for an MBL-dependent C2 bypass mechanism
operating in C2D.

Copyright © 2021 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Ltd.. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.vaccine.2021.01.007 
PMID: 33509693 

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of Competing Interest The authors
declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal
relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this
paper.

