
1. Mol Ther. 2021 Apr 7;29(4):1625-1638. doi: 10.1016/j.ymthe.2020.12.036. Epub 2021
Jan 29.

Lentiviral vector ALS20 yields high hemoglobin levels with low genomic
integrations for treatment of beta-globinopathies.

Breda L(1), Ghiaccio V(2), Tanaka N(2), Jarocha D(2), Ikawa Y(2), Abdulmalik
O(2), Dong A(2), Casu C(2), Raabe TD(3), Shan X(4), Danet-Desnoyers GA(4), Doto
AM(5), Everett J(5), Bushman FD(5), Radaelli E(6), Assenmacher CA(6), Tarrant
JC(6), Hoepp N(7), Kurita R(8), Nakamura Y(8), Guzikowski V(2), Smith-Whitley
K(9), Kwiatkowski JL(9), Rivella S(10).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Hematology, Children's Hospital of Philadelphia (CHOP),
Philadelphia, PA, USA; Department of Pediatrics, Perelman School of Medicine,
University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, PA, USA. Electronic address:
bredal@email.chop.edu.
(2)Division of Hematology, Children's Hospital of Philadelphia (CHOP),
Philadelphia, PA, USA.
(3)Department of Medicine, Perelman School of Medicine, University of
Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, PA, USA.
(4)Stem and Xenograft Core, Perelman School of Medicine, University of
Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, PA, USA.
(5)Department of Microbiology, Perelman School of Medicine, University of
Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, PA, USA.
(6)Department of Pathobiology, School of Veterinary Medicine, University of
Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, PA, USA.
(7)Clinical Pathology Laboratory, School of Veterinary Medicine, University of
Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, PA, USA.
(8)RIKEN BioResource Center, Tsukuba, Ibaraki, Japan.
(9)Division of Hematology, Children's Hospital of Philadelphia (CHOP),
Philadelphia, PA, USA; Department of Pediatrics, Perelman School of Medicine,
University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, PA, USA.
(10)Division of Hematology, Children's Hospital of Philadelphia (CHOP),
Philadelphia, PA, USA; Department of Pediatrics, Perelman School of Medicine,
University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, PA, USA; Cell and Molecular Biology
Affinity Group (CAMB), University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, PA, USA; Raymond
G. Perelman Center for Cellular and Molecular Therapeutics, CHOP, Philadelphia,
PA, USA; Penn Center for Musculoskeletal Disorders, CHOP, Philadelphia, PA, USA. 
Electronic address: rivellas@email.chop.edu.

Ongoing clinical trials for treatment of beta-globinopathies by gene therapy
involve the transfer of the beta-globin gene, which requires integration of three
to four copies per genome in most target cells. This high proviral load may
increase genome toxicity, potentially limiting the safety of this therapy and
relegating its use to total body myeloablation. We hypothesized that introducing 
an additional hypersensitive site from the locus control region, the complete
sequence of the second intron of the beta-globin gene, and the ankyrin insulator 
may enhance beta-globin expression. We identified a construct, ALS20, that
synthesized significantly higher adult hemoglobin levels than those of other
constructs currently used in clinical trials. These findings were confirmed in
erythroblastic cell lines and in primary cells isolated from sickle cell disease 
patients. Bone marrow transplantation studies in beta-thalassemia mice revealed
that ALS20 was curative at less than one copy per genome. Injection of human
CD34+ cells transduced with ALS20 led to safe, long-term, and high polyclonal
engraftment in xenograft experiments. Successful treatment of beta-globinopathies
with ALS20 could potentially be achieved at less than two copies per genome,
minimizing the risk of cytotoxic events and lowering the intensity of
myeloablation.

Copyright © 2020 The American Society of Gene and Cell Therapy. Published by
Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ymthe.2020.12.036 
PMID: 33515514 

