
1. Direct Observational Therapy for the Treatment of Tuberculosis: A Review of
Clinical Evidence and Guidelines [Internet].

Brett K, Severn M.
Ottawa (ON): Canadian Agency for Drugs and Technologies in Health; 2020 Nov.
CADTH Rapid Response Reports.

Tuberculosis (TB) is an infectious disease caused by the bacteria Mycobacterium
tuberculosis.1 It is transmitted between humans primarily through aerosols that
are generated through the forceful expiration of air (e.g., coughing, sneezing).1
Infection with M. tuberculosis does not always result in active TB disease,
producing instead an asymptomatic latent TB infection.1 People with latent TB
cannot spread the disease to others, but they can develop active TB disease.1
Symptoms of active TB disease include a bad cough, fever, and weight loss.2 The
current treatment for active and latent TB involve long courses of antibiotic
treatments, which often include more than one drug.3,4 Incomplete treatment
adherence is a major challenge of TB treatment, and failing to complete the
treatment can result in persistent disease or the development of drug-resistant
TB.5 One of the strategies for improving adherence is directly observed or direct
observational therapy (DOT).3–5 Standard DOT is conducted in person and involves 
directly watching the patient swallow each dose of medication.3 Compared to
self-administered therapy, DOT has been shown to be effective, however, it is
very resource intensive for both the patient and the health care service.5 It is 
unclear who should provide DOT, and whether this person needs to be a health care
professional (e.g., public health nurse) or whether lay people can also provide
DOT (e.g., family, community members). It is also unclear whether the location
where DOT is administered is important. DOT could involve the patients returning 
to a health care facility every day (e.g., TB clinic, hospital), but it is also
possible that DOT can occur at other locations (e.g., workplace, home).
Alternatively, thanks to advances in technology, video observational therapy
(VOT) is possible, where patients are observed taking their medication over video
(often facilitated through a smart phone).5 VOT can occur in real time (i.e.,
synchronous VOT), or patients can record and submit videos (i.e., asynchronous
VOT). VOT could help minimize resources for providing DOT, but there are some
privacy concerns with VOT due to the technology. The purpose of the current
report is to summarize and critically appraise the relevant evidence regarding
the provision of DOT for the treatment of TB. Additionally, evidence-based
guidelines with recommendations regarding the use of DOT for the treatment of TB 
will be reviewed. This report is a component of a larger CADTH Condition Level
Review on TB. A condition level review is an assessment that incorporates all
aspects of a condition, from prevention, detection, treatment, and management.
For more information on CADTH’s Condition Level Review of TB, please visit the
project page (https://www.cadth.ca/tuberculosis).

PMID: 33523614 

