
1. Haematologica. 2020 Nov 19. doi: 10.3324/haematol.2020.249102. [Epub ahead of
print]

Secreted factors from mouse embryonic fibroblasts maintain repopulating function 
of single cultured hematopoietic stem cells.

Marquez Romero S(1), Hettler F(2), Hausinger R(2), Schreck C(2), Landspersky
T(2), Henkel L(3), Angerpointner C(3), Demir IE(4), Schiemann M(3), Bassermann
F(5), Götze KS(5), Istvánffy R(1), Oostendorp RAJ(6).

Author information: 
(1)Technical University of Munich, Klinikum rechts der Isar, Clinic and
Polyclinic for Internal Medicine III, Munich, Germany; Technical University of
Munich, Klinikum rechts der Isar, Department of Surgery, Munich.
(2)Technical University of Munich, Klinikum rechts der Isar, Clinic and
Polyclinic for Internal Medicine III, Munich.
(3)Technical University of Munich, Flow Cytometry Unit of the Technical
University Munich, Institute for Medical Microbiology, Immunology and Hygiene
(CyTUM-MIH), Munich.
(4)Technical University of Munich, Klinikum rechts der Isar, Department of
Surgery, Munich.
(5)Technical University of Munich, Klinikum rechts der Isar, Clinic and
Polyclinic for Internal Medicine III, Munich, Germany; German Cancer Consortium
(DKTK), Heidelberg.
(6)Technical University of Munich, Klinikum rechts der Isar, Clinic and
Polyclinic for Internal Medicine III, Munich. robert.oostendorp@tum.de.

Hematopoietic stem cell self-renewal, proliferation, and differentiation are
independently regulated by intrinsic as well as extrinsic mechanisms. We
previously demonstrated that murine proliferation of hematopoietic stem cells is 
supported in serum-free medium supplemented with two growth factors, stem cell
factor and interleukin 11. The survival of hematopoietic stem cells is
additionally improved by supplementing this medium with two more growth factors, 
neural growth factor and collagen 1 (four growth factors) or serum-free medium
conditioned by the hematopoietic stem cell-supportive stromal UG26-1B6 cells1.
Here, we describe a robust and versatile alternative source of conditioned medium
from mouse embryonic fibroblasts. We found that this conditioned medium supports 
survival and phenotypical identity of hematopoietic stem cells, as well as cell
cycle entry in single cell cultures of CD34- CD48- CD150+ Lineage- SCA1+ KIT+
cells supplemented with two growth factors. Strikingly, in comparison with
cultures in serum-free medium with four growth factors, conditioned medium from
mouse embryonic fibroblasts increases the numbers of proliferating clones and the
number of Lineage- SCA1+ KIT+ cells, both with two and four growth factors. In
addition, conditioned medium from mouse embryonic fibroblasts supports
self-renewal in culture of cells with short- and long-term
hematopoiesis-repopulating ability in vivo. These findings identify conditioned
medium from mouse embryonic fibroblasts as a robust alternative serumfree source 
of factors to maintain self-renewal of in vivo-repopulating hematopoetic stem
cells in culture.

DOI: 10.3324/haematol.2020.249102 
PMID: 33543864 

