
1. Appl Environ Microbiol. 2021 Feb 5. pii: AEM.02684-20. doi: 10.1128/AEM.02684-20.
[Epub ahead of print]

Metagenomics of antimicrobial and heavy metal resistance in the cecal microbiome 
of fattening pigs raised without antibiotics.

Tunsagool P(1), Mhuantong W(2), Tangphatsornruang S(3), Am-In N(4), Chuanchuen
R(5), Luangtongkum T(5), Suriyaphol G(6).

Author information: 
(1)Biochemistry Unit, Department of Physiology, Faculty of Veterinary Science,
Chulalongkorn University, Bangkok, Thailand.
(2)Biorefinery and Bioproduct Technology Research Group, National Center for
Genetic Engineering and Biotechnology, National Science and Technology
Development Agency, Pathum Thani, Thailand.
(3)National Omics Center, National Science and Technology Development Agency,
Pathum Thani, Thailand.
(4)Department of Obstetrics, Gynaecology and Reproduction, Faculty of Veterinary 
Science, Chulalongkorn University, Bangkok, Thailand.
(5)Research Unit in Microbial Food Safety and Antimicrobial Resistance,
Department of Veterinary Public Health, Faculty of Veterinary Science,
Chulalongkorn University, Bangkok, Thailand.
(6)Biochemistry Unit, Department of Physiology, Faculty of Veterinary Science,
Chulalongkorn University, Bangkok, Thailand Gunnaporn.V@chula.ac.th.

This study aimed to detect the cecal microbiome, antimicrobial resistance (AMR)
and heavy metal resistance genes (MRGs) in fattening pigs raised under
antibiotic-free (ABF) conditions compared with ordinary industrial pigs (control,
C) using whole-genome shotgun sequencing. ABF pigs showed the enrichment of
Prevotella (33%) and Lactobacillus (13%), whereas Escherichia coli (40%),
Fusobacterium and Bacteroides (each at 4%) were notably observed in the C group. 
Distinct clusters of cecal microbiota of ABF and C pigs were revealed; however,
microbiota of some C pigs (C1) appeared in the same cluster as ABF and were
totally separated from the remaining C pigs (C2). For AMR genes, the highest
abundance tet(Q) (35.7%) and mef(A) (12.7%) were markedly observed in the ABF
group whereas tet(Q) (26.2%) and tet(W) (10.4%) were shown in the C group. tet(Q)
was positively correlated to Prevotella in ABF and C1 samples. In the C2 group,
the prominent tet(W) was positively correlated to Fusobacterium and Bacteroides
Pigs have never received tetracycline but pregnant sows used chlortetracycline
once 7 d before parturition. Chromosomal Cu and Zn resistance genes were also
shown in both groups regardless the received Cu and Zn feed additives. A higher
abundance of multi-metal resistance genes was observed in the C group (44%)
compared with the ABF group (41%). In conclusion, the microbiome clusters in some
C pigs were similar to that in ABF pigs. High abundant tetracycline resistance
genes interrelated to major bacteria were observed in both ABF and C pigs. MRGs
were also observed.IMPORTANCE: Owing to the increased problem of AMR in farm
animals, raising farm animals without antibiotics is one method that could solve 
this problem. Our study showed that only some tetracycline and macrolide
resistance genes, tet(Q), tet(W) and mef(A), were markedly abundant in ABF and C 
groups. The tet(Q) and tet(W) genes interrelated to different predominant
bacteria in each group, showing the potential role of major bacteria as
reservoirs of AMR genes. In addition, chromosomal Cu and Zn resistance genes were
also observed in both pig groups, not depending on the use of Cu and Zn additives
in both farms. The association of MRGs and AMR genotypes and phenotypes together 
with the method to re-sensitize bacteria to antibiotics should be studied further
to unveil the cause of high resistance genes and solve the problems.

Copyright © 2021 American Society for Microbiology.

DOI: 10.1128/AEM.02684-20 
PMID: 33547058 

