
1. Physiol Rep. 2021 Feb;9(3):e14693. doi: 10.14814/phy2.14693.

Biological subphenotypes of acute respiratory distress syndrome may not reflect
differences in alveolar inflammation.

Heijnen NFL(1), Hagens LA(2), Smit MR(2), Schultz MJ(2)(3)(4)(5), van der Poll
T(6)(7), Schnabel RM(1), van der Horst ICC(1), Dickson RP(8)(9)(10), Bergmans
DCJJ(1), Bos LDJ(2); BASIC consortium.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Intensive Care, Maastricht University Medical Center+,
Maastricht, The Netherlands.
(2)Department of Intensive Care, Amsterdam University Medical Centers, Location
Academic Medical Center, Amsterdam, The Netherlands.
(3)Laboratory of Experimental Intensive Care and Anesthesiology (L·E·I·C·A),
Academic Medical Centers, Location Academic Medical Center, University of
Amsterdam, Amsterdam, The Netherlands.
(4)Mahidol-Oxford Tropical Medicine Research Unit (MORU), Mahidol University,
Bangkok, Thailand.
(5)Nuffield Department of Medicine, University of Oxford, Oxford, UK.
(6)Center for Experimental and Molecular Medicine, Amsterdam University Medical
Centers, Location Academic Medical Center, University of Amsterdam, Amsterdam,
The Netherlands.
(7)Division of Infectious Diseases, Amsterdam University Medical Centers,
Location Academic Medical Center, University of Amsterdam, Amsterdam, The
Netherlands.
(8)Division of Pulmonary and Critical Care Medicine, Department of Internal
Medicine, University of Michigan Medical School, Ann Arbor, MI, USA.
(9)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, University of Michigan Medical
School, Ann Arbor, MI, USA.
(10)Michigan Center for Integrative Research in Critical Care, Ann Arbor, MI,
USA.

Biological subphenotypes have been identified in acute respiratory distress
syndrome (ARDS) based on two parsimonious models: the "uninflamed" and "reactive"
subphenotype (cluster-model) and "hypo-inflammatory" and "hyper-inflammatory"
(latent class analysis (LCA) model). The distinction between the subphenotypes is
mainly driven by inflammatory and coagulation markers in plasma. However,
systemic inflammation is not specific for ARDS and it is unknown whether these
subphenotypes also reflect differences in the alveolar compartment. Alveolar
inflammation and dysbiosis of the lung microbiome have shown to be important
mediators in the development of lung injury. This study aimed to determine
whether the "reactive" or "hyper-inflammatory" biological subphenotype also had
higher concentrations of inflammatory mediators and enrichment of gut-associated 
bacteria in the lung. Levels of alveolar inflammatory mediators myeloperoxidase
(MPO), surfactant protein D (SPD), interleukin (IL)-1b, IL-6, IL-10, IL-8,
interferon gamma (IFN-ƴ), and tumor necrosis factor-alpha (TNFα) were determined 
in the mini-BAL fluid. Key features of the lung microbiome were measured:
bacterial burden (16S rRNA gene copies/ml), community diversity (Shannon
Diversity Index), and community composition. No statistically significant
differences between the "uninflamed" and "reactive" ARDS subphenotypes were found
in a selected set of alveolar inflammatory mediators and key features of the lung
microbiome. LCA-derived subphenotypes and stratification based on cause of ARDS
(direct vs. indirect) showed similar profiles, suggesting that current
subphenotypes may not reflect the alveolar host response. It is important for
future research to elucidate the pulmonary biology within each subphenotype
properly, which is arguably a target for intervention.

© 2021 The Authors. Physiological Reports published by Wiley Periodicals LLC on
behalf of The Physiological Society and the American Physiological Society.

DOI: 10.14814/phy2.14693 
PMCID: PMC7865405
PMID: 33547768 

