
1. Mucosal Immunol. 2021 Feb 4. doi: 10.1038/s41385-021-00377-8. [Epub ahead of
print]

mTOR-driven glycolysis governs induction of innate immune responses by bronchial 
epithelial cells exposed to the bacterial component flagellin.

Ramirez-Moral I(1), Yu X(2), Butler JM(3), van Weeghel M(4), Otto NA(3), Ferreira
BL(3), Maele LV(5), Sirard JC(5), de Vos AF(3), de Jong MD(2), Houtkooper RH(4), 
van der Poll T(3)(6).

Author information: 
(1)Center of Experimental and Molecular Medicine, Amsterdam UMC, University of
Amsterdam, Amsterdam, The Netherlands. i.ramirezmoral@amsterdamumc.nl.
(2)Department of Medical Microbiology, Amsterdam UMC, University of Amsterdam,
Amsterdam, The Netherlands.
(3)Center of Experimental and Molecular Medicine, Amsterdam UMC, University of
Amsterdam, Amsterdam, The Netherlands.
(4)Laboratory Genetic Metabolic Diseases, Amsterdam Gastroenterology and
Metabolism, Amsterdam Cardiovascular Sciences, Amsterdam UMC, University of
Amsterdam, Amsterdam, The Netherlands.
(5)CNRS, Inserm, CHU Lille, Institut Pasteur de Lille, U1019-UMR9017-CIIL-Center 
for Infection and Immunity of Lille, Université de Lille, Lille, France.
(6)Division of Infectious Diseases, Amsterdam UMC, University of Amsterdam,
Amsterdam, The Netherlands.

Human bronchial epithelial (HBE) cells play an essential role during bacterial
infections of the airways by sensing pathogens and orchestrating protective
immune responses. We here sought to determine which metabolic pathways are
utilized by HBE cells to mount innate immune responses upon exposure to a
relevant bacterial agonist. Stimulation of HBE cells by the bacterial component
flagellin triggered activation of the mTOR pathway resulting in an increased
glycolytic flux that sustained the secretory activity of immune mediators by HBE 
cells. The mTOR inhibitor rapamycin impeded glycolysis and limited
flagellin-induced secretion of immune mediators. The role of the mTOR pathway was
recapitulated in vivo in a mouse model of flagellin-triggered lung innate immune 
responses. These data demonstrate that metabolic reprogramming via the mTOR
pathway modulates activation of the respiratory epithelium, identifying mTOR as a
potential therapeutic target to modulate mucosal immunity in the context of
bacterial infections.

DOI: 10.1038/s41385-021-00377-8 
PMID: 33542495 

