
1. Front Microbiol. 2021 Jan 20;11:581118. doi: 10.3389/fmicb.2020.581118.
eCollection 2020.

"The Good, the Bad and the Double-Sword" Effects of Microplastics and Their
Organic Additives in Marine Bacteria.

Fernández-Juárez V(1), López-Alforja X(1), Frank-Comas A(1), Echeveste P(2),
Bennasar-Figueras A(3), Ramis-Munar G(4), Gomila RM(5), Agawin NSR(1).

Author information: 
(1)Marine Ecology and Systematics (MarES), Department of Biology, University of
the Balearic Islands, Palma de Mallorca, Spain.
(2)Instituto de Ciencias Naturales Alexander von Humboldt, Universidad de
Antofagasta, Antofagasta, Chile.
(3)Grup de Recerca en Microbiologia, Departament de Biologia, Universitat de les 
Illes Balears, Palma de Mallorca, Spain.
(4)Celomic Unit of the University Institute of Research in Health Sciences of the
Balearic Islands, Palma de Mallorca, Spain.
(5)Servicio Científico-Técnicos, University of the Balearic Islands, Palma de
Mallorca, Spain.

Little is known about the direct effects of microplastics (MPs) and their organic
additives on marine bacteria, considering their role in the nutrient cycles,
e.g., N-cycles through the N2-fixation, or in the microbial food web. To fill
this gap of knowledge, we exposed marine bacteria, specifically diazotrophs, to
pure MPs which differ in physical properties (e.g., density, hydrophobicity,
and/or size), namely, polyethylene, polypropylene, polyvinyl chloride and
polystyrene, and to their most abundant associated organic additives (e.g.,
fluoranthene, 1,2,5,6,9,10-hexabromocyclododecane and dioctyl-phthalate). Growth,
protein overproduction, direct physical interactions between MPs and bacteria,
phosphorus acquisition mechanisms and/or N2-fixation rates were evaluated.
Cyanobacteria were positively affected by environmental and high concentrations
of MPs, as opposed to heterotrophic strains, that were only positively affected
with high concentrations of ~120 μm-size MPs (detecting the overproduction of
proteins related to plastic degradation and C-transport), and negatively affected
by 1 μm-size PS beads. Generally, the organic additives had a deleterious effect 
in both autotrophic and heterotrophic bacteria and the magnitude of the effect is
suggested to be dependent on bacterial size. Our results show species-specific
responses of the autotrophic and heterotrophic bacteria tested and the responses 
(beneficial: the "good," deleterious: the "bad" and/or both: the "double-sword") 
were dependent on the type and concentration of MPs and additives. This suggests 
the need to determine the threshold levels of MPs and additives concentrations
starting from which significant effects can be observed for key microbial
populations in marine systems, and these data are necessary for effective
environmental quality control management.

Copyright © 2021 Fernández-Juárez, López-Alforja, Frank-Comas, Echeveste,
Bennasar-Figueras, Ramis-Munar, Gomila and Agawin.

DOI: 10.3389/fmicb.2020.581118 
PMCID: PMC7854915
PMID: 33552008 

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.

