
1. Gut. 2021 Feb 10. pii: gutjnl-2020-322744. doi: 10.1136/gutjnl-2020-322744. [Epub
ahead of print]

Inflammatory cell-derived CXCL3 promotes pancreatic cancer metastasis through a
novel myofibroblast-hijacked cancer escape mechanism.

Sun X(1)(2)(3), He X(2), Zhang Y(2), Hosaka K(2), Andersson P(2), Wu J(2), Wu
J(2), Jing X(2), Du Q(2), Hui X(4), Ding B(5), Guo Z(6), Hong A(7), Liu X(8),
Wang Y(1)(3), Ji Q(1)(3), Beyaert R(9), Yang Y(10), Li Q(11)(3), Cao Y(12).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Oncology, Shuguang Hospital, Shanghai University of
Traditional Chinese Medicine, Shanghai, China.
(2)Department of Microbiology, Tumor and Cell Biology, Biomedicum, Karolinska
Institutet, Stockholm, Sweden.
(3)Academy of Integrative Medicine, Shanghai University of Traditional Chinese
Medicine, Shanghai, China.
(4)Department of Geriatric-Endocrinology, The First Affiliated Hospital, Xi'an
Jiaotong University, Xi'an, China.
(5)Department of Respiratory Disease, The Fourth Hospital of Jinan, Jinan, China.
(6)Department of Pancreatic Surgery, West China Hospital, Sichuan University,
Chengdu, China.
(7)Institute of Biomedicine & Department of Cell Biology, National Engineering
Research Center of Genetic Medicine, Guangdong Provincial Key Laboratory of
Bioengineering Medicine, Jinan University, Guangzhou, China.
(8)Changzheng Hospital, Second Military Medical University, Shanghai, China.
(9)VIB-UGent Center for Inflammation Research, VIB; Department of Biomedical
Molecular Biology, Ghent University, Belgium.
(10)Department of Cellular and Genetic Medicine, School of Basic Medical
Sciences, Fudan University, Shanghai, China yunlongyang@fudan.edu.cn
qili@shutcm.edu.cn yihai.cao@ki.se.
(11)Department of Medical Oncology, Shuguang Hospital, Shanghai University of
Traditional Chinese Medicine, Shanghai, China yunlongyang@fudan.edu.cn
qili@shutcm.edu.cn yihai.cao@ki.se.
(12)Department of Microbiology, Tumor and Cell Biology, Biomedicum, Karolinska
Institutet, Stockholm, Sweden yunlongyang@fudan.edu.cn qili@shutcm.edu.cn
yihai.cao@ki.se.

OBJECTIVE: Pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma (PDAC) is the most lethal malignancy 
and lacks effective treatment. We aimed to understand molecular mechanisms of the
intertwined interactions between tumour stromal components in metastasis and to
provide a new paradigm for PDAC therapy.
DESIGN: Two unselected cohorts of 154 and 20 patients with PDAC were subjected to
correlation between interleukin (IL)-33 and CXCL3 levels and survivals. Unbiased 
expression profiling, and genetic and pharmacological gain-of-function and
loss-of-function approaches were employed to identify molecular signalling in
tumour-associated macrophages (TAMs) and myofibroblastic cancer-associated
fibroblasts (myoCAFs). The role of the IL-33-ST2-CXCL3-CXCR2 axis in PDAC
metastasis was evaluated in three clinically relevant mouse PDAC models.
RESULTS: IL-33 was specifically elevated in human PDACs and positively correlated
with tumour inflammation in human patients with PDAC. CXCL3 was highly
upregulated in IL-33-stimulated macrophages that were the primary source of
CXCL3. CXCL3 was correlated with poor survival in human patients with PDAC.
Mechanistically, activation of the IL-33-ST2-MYC pathway attributed to high CXCL3
production. The highest level of CXCL3 was found in PDAC relative to other cancer
types and its receptor CXCR2 was almost exclusively expressed in CAFs. Activation
of CXCR2 by CXCL3 induced a CAF-to-myoCAF transition and α-smooth muscle actin
(α-SMA) was uniquely upregulated by the CXCL3-CXCR2 signalling. Type III collagen
was identified as the CXCL3-CXCR2-targeted adhesive molecule responsible for
myoCAF-driven PDAC metastasis.
CONCLUSIONS: Our work provides novel mechanistic insights into understanding PDAC
metastasis by the TAM-CAF interaction and targeting each of these signalling
components would provide an attractive and new paradigm for treating pancreatic
cancer.

© Author(s) (or their employer(s)) 2021. No commercial re-use. See rights and
permissions. Published by BMJ.

DOI: 10.1136/gutjnl-2020-322744 
PMID: 33568427 

Conflict of interest statement: Competing interests: None declared.

