
1. J Infect Dev Ctries. 2021 Jan 31;15(1):102-112. doi: 10.3855/jidc.13404.

Evaluation of the probiotic and postbiotic potential of lactic acid bacteria from
artisanal dairy products against pathogens.

Hussain N(1), Tariq M(1), Saris PEJ(2), Zaidi A(3).

Author information: 
(1)National Probiotics Lab-HBD, National Institute for Biotechnology and Genetic 
Engineering (NIBGE), Faisalabad, Pakistan.
(2)Department of Microbiology, University of Helsinki, Helsinki, Finland.
(3)National Probiotics Lab-HBD, National Institute for Biotechnology and Genetic 
Engineering (NIBGE), Faisalabad, Pakistan. azlanzaidi@yahoo.com.

INTRODUCTION: Probiotic and postbiotic potential of thirty-two strains of lactic 
acid bacteria (LAB), obtained earlier from artisanal dairy sources in Pakistan,
have been investigated against major multi-drug resistant (MDR) and food borne
pathogenic bacteria.
METHODOLOGY: LAB strains were identified by 16S rRNA gene sequencing and their
antibacterial activity was assessed by the microdilution method. Four LAB
isolates, Weissella confusa PL6, Enterococcus faecium PL7, and Lactobacillus
delbrueckii PL11 and PL13 were shortlisted. Their ability to degrade lactose and 
safety for human consumption in terms of hemolysis and antibiotic susceptibility 
were assessed in vitro. The antibacterial components in the cell-free
supernatants (CFSs) of isolate cultures were characterized biochemically by HPLC.
RESULTS: Acid neutralization but not protease treatment abolished the
antibacterial activity of CFSs. Lactic, acetic and propionic acids were the main 
acids in the CFSs, and acid production peaked in the stationary phase of growth. 
The antibacterial activity of the LAB cultures resulted from secretion of organic
acids that lowered the pH. The strains exhibited variable ability to degrade
lactose and were non-hemolytic and susceptible to the most common antibiotics.
CONCLUSIONS: These LAB strains are probiotic candidates for further investigation
of their postbiotic role in naturally preserving processed foods and for
attenuation of lactose intolerance.

Copyright (c) 2021 Nazar Hussain, Muhammad Tariq, Per Erik Joakim Saris, Arsalan 
Zaidi.

DOI: 10.3855/jidc.13404 
PMID: 33571152 

Conflict of interest statement: No Conflict of Interest is declared

