
1. Int Immunopharmacol. 2021 Feb 12;94:107456. doi: 10.1016/j.intimp.2021.107456.
[Epub ahead of print]

Hypoxia and Porphyromonas gingivalis-lipopolysaccharide synergistically induce
NLRP3 inflammasome activation in human gingival fibroblasts.

Yang K(1), Xu S(2), Zhao H(3), Liu L(4), Lv X(1), Hu F(1), Wang L(1), Ji Q(5).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Periodontology, The Affiliated Hospital of Qingdao University,
Qingdao, Shandong, China; School of Stomatology, Qingdao University, Qingdao,
Shandong, China.
(2)Laboratory of Oral Microbiology, Shanghai Research Institute of Stomatology,
Ninth People's Hospital, Shanghai Jiao Tong University School of Medicine,
Shanghai, China.
(3)Department of Prosthodontics, The Affiliated Hospital of Qingdao University,
Qingdao, Shandong, China.
(4)Department of Endodontics, The Affiliated Hospital of Qingdao University,
Qingdao, Shandong, China.
(5)Department of Periodontology, The Affiliated Hospital of Qingdao University,
Qingdao, Shandong, China; School of Stomatology, Qingdao University, Qingdao,
Shandong, China. Electronic address: jqx_1@163.com.

OBJECTIVE: To investigate the effects of hypoxia and Porphyromonas gingivalis-
lipopolysaccharide (P. gingivalis-LPS) on activation of the NACHT leucine-rich
repeat protein 3 (NLRP3) inflammasome in human gingival fibroblasts (HGFs).
DESIGN: Periodontitis was optimally simulated using a hypoxic concentration of
1%. HGFs were stimulated using P. gingivalis-LPS (1.0 μg/ml) in normoxia and
hypoxia for 3 h and 6 h, respectively. The expression levels of genes and
proteins of hypoxia-inducible factor-1α (HIF-1α), interleukin-1β, gasdermin D
(GSDMD) and the NLRP3 inflammasome, including NLRP3, apoptosis-associated
speck-like protein containing CARD (ASC), caspase-1 and its activated forms, were
measured using quantitative real-time polymerase chain reaction and western blot.
ELISA was used to detect and determine levels of the inflammatory factor
interleukin-1β in cell supernatants. Lactate dehydrogenase (LDH) release assay,
caspase-1 activity assay and Hoechst 33342/Propidium Iodide (PI) staining were
performed to further verify the presence of pyroptosis.
RESULTS: The NLRP3 inflammasome (i.e., NLRP3, ASC, caspase-1) was not affected by
individual stimulation using P. gingivalis-LPS or hypoxia. However, the
combination of both hypoxia and P. gingivalis-LPS stimulation significantly
enhanced inflammasome activation and promoted the expression of interleukin-1β,
gasdermin D and HIF-1α at gene and protein levels; PI positive cells and the
release of LDH were also elevated.
CONCLUSION: Hypoxia and P. gingivalis-LPS synergistically induced NLRP3
inflammasome activation in HGFs, and subsequently high levels of interleukin-1β
and GSDMD-mediated pyroptosis can cause an HGF inflammatory response, which plays
an important role in the pathogenesis of periodontitis.

Copyright © 2021 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.intimp.2021.107456 
PMID: 33588175 

