
1. Trop Biomed. 2017 Jun 1;34(2):363-374.

Soil-Transmitted Helminths in Malaysia landscape: an aborigines study.

Brandon-Mong GJ(1), Abdullah NA(1), Shukor N(1), Jaturas N(1)(2), Richard RL(1), 
Choo JC(1)(3), Majid MAA(1), Mahboob T(1), Tan TC(1), Sawangjaroen N(4),
Nissapatorn V(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Parasitology (Southeast Asia for Neglected Tropical Diseases),
Faculty of Medicine, University of Malaya, Kuala Lumpur 50603, Malaysia.
(2)Department of Microbiology and Parasitology, Faculty of Medical Science,
Naresuan University, Phitsanulok 65000, Thailand.
(3)Department of Biomedical Science, Faculty of Health Sciences, International
Medical University, Kuala Lumpur 57000, Malaysia.
(4)Department of Microbiology, Faculty of Science, Prince of Songkla University, 
Songkhla, 90110, Thailand.

Soil-transmitted helminths (STH) is a group of parasitic nematodes, including
Trichuris trichiura, Ascaris lumbricoides, Ancylostoma duodenale and Necator
americanus, which can cause gastrointestinal disorders in humans. STH is
prevalent among neglected communities in both developing and developed countries.
This present study aims to determine the current prevalence of STH infections in 
Aboriginal population after mass delivering of antihelminthic drugs was proposed 
by WHO in 2005 and a health education learning package (HELP) was initiated in
Malaysia in 2012. A total of 235 human fecal samples were collected and a
pre-tested questionnaire was given to gather information about the
socio-demographic of the Aborigine communities living in Kedah and Selangor,
Malaysia. The samples were screened by a direct-fecal smear and confirmed by
formalin-ether sedimentation methods. From human faeces, 81.7% was found to be
infected with one or more STH species. T. trichiura was the most commonly
detected (76.6%), followed by hookworms (26.4%) and A. lumbricoides (19.1%).
Triple infections were found in 6.4% of the studied population. Univariate
analysis showed that individuals with age group, male, presence of indoor toilet,
family size with <7 members and bad living habits (i.e., without antihelminthic
drugs) were significantly associated with STH infections. The analysis further
showed that walking barefoot was the significant contributing factor to hookworm 
infections. The high prevalence of human STH infections is alarming. Thus, the
urgency in implementing health education related behavioral practice and hygiene 
to reduce disease burden in these rural communities are a crucial need.


PMID: 33593017 

