
1. FEBS J. 2021 Feb 25. doi: 10.1111/febs.15789. [Epub ahead of print]

Crystal structure of the sugar acid-binding protein CxaP from a TRAP transporter 
in Advenella mimigardefordensis strain DPN7T.

Schäfer L(1), Meinert-Berning C(1), Kobus S(2), Höppner A(2), Smits SHJ(2)(3),
Steinbüchel A(1)(4).

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Molecular Microbiology and Biotechnology, Westfälische Wilhelms
University Münster, Münster, Germany.
(2)Center for Structural Studies, Heinrich Heine University Düsseldorf,
Düsseldorf, Germany.
(3)Institute of Biochemistry, Heinrich Heine University Düsseldorf, Düsseldorf,
Germany.
(4)Environmental Science Department, King Abdulaziz University, Jeddah, Saudi
Arabia.

Recently, CxaP, a sugar acid substrate binding protein (SBP) from
Advenella mimigardefordensis strain DPN7T , was identified as part of a novel
sugar uptake strategy. In the present study, the protein was successfully
crystallized. Although several SBP structures of tripartite ATP-independent
periplasmic transporters have already been solved, this is the first structure of
an SBP accepting multiple sugar acid ligands. Protein crystals were obtained with
bound d-xylonic acid, d-fuconic acid d-galactonic and d-gluconic acid,
respectively. The protein shows the typical structure of an SBP of a tripartite
ATP-independent periplasmic transporter consisting of two domains linked by a
hinge and spanned by a long α-helix. By analysis of the structure, the substrate 
binding site of the protein was identified. The carboxylic group of the sugar
acids interacts with Arg175, whereas the coordination of the hydroxylic groups at
positions C2 and C3 is most probably realized by Arg154 and Asn151. Furthermore, 
it was observed that 2-keto-3-deoxy-d-gluconic acid is bound in protein crystals 
that were crystallized without the addition of any ligand, indicating that this
molecule is prebound to the protein and is displaced by the other ligands if they
are available. DATABASE: Structural data of CxaP complexes are available in the
worldwide Protein Data Bank (https://www.rcsb.org) under the accession codes 7BBR
(2-keto-3-deoxy-d-gluconic acid), 7BCR (d-galactonic acid), 7BCN (d-xylonic
acid), 7BCO (d-fuconic acid) and 7BCP (d-gluconic acid).

© 2021 The Authors. The FEBS Journal published by John Wiley & Sons Ltd on behalf
of Federation of European Biochemical Societies.

DOI: 10.1111/febs.15789 
PMID: 33630388 

