
1. Water Res. 2021 Apr 15;194:116923. doi: 10.1016/j.watres.2021.116923. Epub 2021
Feb 11.

Multibiomarker-based assessment of toxicity of central European strains of
filamentous cyanobacteria Aphanizomenon gracile and Raphidiopsis raciborskii to
zebrafish Danio rerio.

Falfushynska H(1), Horyn O(2), Osypenko I(2), Rzymski P(3), Wejnerowski Ł(4),
Dziuba MK(4), Sokolova IM(5).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Orthopedagogy and Physical Therapy, Ternopil V. Hnatiuk National
Pedagogical University, Ternopil, Ukraine; Department of Marine Biology,
Institute for Biological Sciences, University of Rostock, Rostock, Germany.
(2)Department of Orthopedagogy and Physical Therapy, Ternopil V. Hnatiuk National
Pedagogical University, Ternopil, Ukraine.
(3)Department of Environmental Medicine, Poznan University of Medical Sciences,
Poznan, Poland; Integrated Science Association (ISA), Universal Scientific
Education and Research Network (USERN), Poznań, Poland.
(4)Department of Hydrobiology, Institute of Environmental Biology, Faculty of
Biology, Adam Mickiewicz University in Poznań, Uniwersytetu Poznańskiego 6,
61-614 Poznań, Poland.
(5)Department of Marine Biology, Institute for Biological Sciences, University of
Rostock, Rostock, Germany; Department of Maritime Systems, Interdisciplinary
Faculty, University of Rostock, Rostock, Germany. Electronic address:
inna.sokolova@uni-rostock.de.

The global increase in cyanobacterial blooms poses environmental and health
threats. Selected cyanobacterial strains reveal toxicities despite a lack of
synthesis of known toxic metabolites, and the mechanisms of these toxicities are 
not well understood. Here we investigated the toxicity of non-cylindrospermopsin 
and non-microcystin producing Aphanizomenon gracile and Raphidiopsis raciborskii 
of Central European origin to zebrafish exposed for 14 days to their extracts.
Toxicological screening revealed the presence of anabaenopeptins and a lack of
anatoxin-a, ß-methylamino-L-alanine or saxitoxins in examined extracts. The
responses were compared to 20 μg L-1 of common cyanobacterial toxins
cylindrospermopsin (CYN) and microcystin-LR (MC-LR). The expression of the marker
genes involved in apoptosis (caspase 3a and 3b, Bcl-2, BAX, p53, MAPK, Nrf2), DNA
damage detection and repair (GADD45, RAD51, JUN, XPC), detoxification (CYP1A,
CYP26, EPHX1), lipid metabolism (PPARa, FABP1, PLA2),
phosphorylation/dephosphorylation (PPP6C, PPM1) and cytoskeleton (actin, tubulin)
were examined using targeted transcriptomics. Cellular stress and toxicity
biomarkers (oxidative injury, antioxidant enzymes, thiol pool status, and lactate
dehydrogenase activity) were measured in the liver, and acetylcholinesterase
activity was determined as an index of neurotoxicity in the brain. The extracts
of three cyanobacterial strains that produce no known cyanotoxins caused marked
toxicity in D. rerio, and the biomarker profiles indicate different toxic
mechanisms between the bioactive compounds extracted from these strains and the
purified cyanotoxins. All studied cyanobacterial extracts and purified
cyanotoxins induced oxidative stress and neurotoxicity, downregulated Nrf2 and
CYP26B1, disrupted phosphorylation/dephosphorylation processes and actin/tubulin 
cytoskeleton and upregulated apoptotic activity in the liver. The tested strains 
and purified toxins displayed distinctively different effects on lipid
metabolism. Unlike CYN and MC-LR, the Central European strain of A. gracile and
R. raciborskii did not reveal a genotoxic potential. These findings help to
further understand the ecotoxicological consequences of toxic cyanobacterial
blooms in freshwater ecosystems.

Copyright © 2021 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.watres.2021.116923 
PMID: 33631698  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of Competing Interest The authors
declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal
relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this
paper.

