
1. Neuro Oncol. 2021 Feb 28. pii: noab041. doi: 10.1093/neuonc/noab041. [Epub ahead 
of print]

Enhanced brain delivery and therapeutic activity of trastuzumab after blood-brain
barrier opening by NEO100 in mouse models of brain-metastatic breast cancer.

Wang W(1), He H(2), Marín-Ramos NI(1), Zeng S(2), Swenson SD(1), Cho HY(1), Fu
J(3), Beringer PM(4), Neman J(1)(5), Chen L(2), Schönthal AH(6), Chen TC(1)(5).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neurological Surgery, Keck School of Medicine, University of
Southern California, Los Angeles, California, USA.
(2)Department of Neurosurgery, Affiliated Hospital of Southwest Medical
University, Luzhou, China.
(3)Department of Neurology, Affiliated Hospital of Southwest Medical University, 
Luzhou, China.
(4)Department of Clinical Pharmacy, School of Pharmacy, University of Southern
California, Los Angeles, California, USA.
(5)Norris Comprehensive Cancer Center, Keck School of Medicine, University of
Southern California, Los Angeles, California, USA.
(6)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, Keck School of Medicine, University
of Southern California, Los Angeles, California, USA.

BACKGROUND: The antitumor efficacy of human epidermal growth factor receptor 2
(HER2)-targeted therapies, such as humanized monoclonal antibody trastuzumab
(Herceptin®, Roche), in patients with breast-to-brain cancer metastasis is
hindered by the low permeability of the blood-brain barrier (BBB). NEO100 is a
high-purity version of the natural monoterpene perillyl alcohol, produced under
current good manufacturing practice (cGMP) regulations, that was shown previously
to reversibly open the BBB in rodent models. Here we investigated whether NEO100 
could enable brain entry of trastuzumab to achieve greater therapeutic activity.
METHODS: An in vitro BBB, consisting of human astrocytes and brain endothelial
cells, was used to determine trastuzumab penetration in the presence or absence
of NEO100. For in vivo studies, we administered intravenous (IV) trastuzumab or
the trastuzumab-drug conjugate ado-trastuzumab emtansine (T-DM1; Kadcyla®,
Roche), to mouse models harboring intracranial HER2+ breast cancer, with or
without BBB opening via IA NEO100. Brain and tumor tissues were examined for the 
presence of trastuzumab and infiltration of immune cells. Therapeutic impact was 
evaluated based on overall survival.
RESULTS: NEO100 greatly increased trastuzumab penetration across an in vitro BBB.
In vivo, IA NEO100-mediated BBB opening resulted in brain tumor-selective
accumulation of trastuzumab, without detectable presence in normal brain tissue, 
along with increased presence of immune cell populations. IV delivery of
trastuzumab or T-DM1 achieved significantly greater overall survival of
tumor-bearing mice when combined with IA NEO100.
CONCLUSION: IA NEO100 facilitates brain tumor entry of trastuzumab and T-DM1 and 
significantly enhances their therapeutic efficacy, along with increased
antibody-dependent immune cell recruitment.

© The Author(s) 2021. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the
Society for Neuro-Oncology. All rights reserved. For permissions, please e-mail: 
journals.permissions@oup.com.

DOI: 10.1093/neuonc/noab041 
PMID: 33659980 

