
1. Fish Shellfish Immunol. 2021 May;112:81-91. doi: 10.1016/j.fsi.2021.02.017. Epub 
2021 Mar 4.

Modulation of the mucosal immune response of red tilapia (Oreochromis sp.)
against columnaris disease using a biomimetic-mucoadhesive nanovaccine.

Kitiyodom S(1), Trullàs C(1), Rodkhum C(2), Thompson KD(3), Katagiri T(4),
Temisak S(5), Namdee K(6), Yata T(7), Pirarat N(8).

Author information: 
(1)Wildlife Exotic Aquatic Animal Pathology-Research Unit, Department of
Pathology, Faculty of Veterinary Science, Chulalongkorn University, Bangkok,
10330, Thailand.
(2)Department of Microbiology, Faculty of Veterinary Science, Chulalongkorn
University, Bangkok, 10330, Thailand.
(3)Moredun Research Institute, Pentlands Science Park, Penicuik, UK.
(4)Laboratory of Fish Health Management, Course of Aquatic Biosciences, Tokyo
University of Marine Science and Technology, Tokyo, Japan.
(5)Bio Analysis Group, Chemical Metrology and Biometry Department, National
Institute of Metrology (NIMT), Pathum Thani, 12120, Thailand.
(6)National Nanotechnology Center (NANOTEC), National Science and Technology
Development Agency (NSTDA), Pathum Thani, 12120, Thailand.
(7)Biochemistry Unit, Department of Physiology, Faculty of Veterinary Science,
Chulalongkorn University, Bangkok, 10330, Thailand. Electronic address:
teerapong@chula.ac.th.
(8)Wildlife Exotic Aquatic Animal Pathology-Research Unit, Department of
Pathology, Faculty of Veterinary Science, Chulalongkorn University, Bangkok,
10330, Thailand. Electronic address: Nopadon.P@chula.ac.th.

Columnaris, a highly contagious bacterial disease caused by Flavobacterium
columnare, is recognized as one of the most important infectious diseases in
farmed tilapia, especially during the fry and fingerling stages of production.
The disease is associated with characteristic lesions in the mucosa of affected
fish, particularly their skin and gills. Vaccines delivered via the mucosa are
therefore of great interest to scientists developing vaccines for this disease.
In the present study, we characterized field isolates of F. columnare obtained
from clinical columnaris outbreaks in red tilapia to select an isolate to use as 
a candidate for our vaccine study. This included characterizing its colony
morphology, genotype and virulence status. The isolate was incorporated into a
mucoadhesive polymer chitosan-complexed nanovaccine (CS-NE), the efficacy of
which was determined by experimentally infecting red tilapia that had been
vaccinated with the nanoparticles by immersion. The experimental infection was
performed 30-days post-vaccination (dpv), which resulted in 89% of the
unvaccinated control fish dying, while the relative percentage survival (RPS) of 
the CS-NE vaccinated group was 78%. Histology of the mucosal associated lymphoid 
tissue (MALT) showed a significantly higher presence of leucocytes and a greater 
antigen uptake by the mucosal epithelium in CS-NE vaccinated fish compared to
control fish and whole cell vaccinated fish, respectively, and there was
statistically significant up-regulation of IgT, IgM, TNF α, IL1-β and MHC-1 genes
in the gill of the CS-NE vaccinated group. Overall, the results of our study
confirmed that the CS-NE particles achieved better adsorption onto the mucosal
surfaces of the fish, elicited great vaccine efficacy and modulated the MALT
immune response better than the conventional whole cell-killed vaccine,
demonstrating the feasibility of the mucoadhesive nano-immersion vaccine as an
effective delivery system for the induction of a mucosal immune response against 
columnaris disease in tilapia.

Copyright © 2021 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.fsi.2021.02.017 
PMID: 33675991 

