
1. Front Immunol. 2021 Feb 19;12:604066. doi: 10.3389/fimmu.2021.604066. eCollection
2021.

Effective Activation and Expansion of Canine Lymphocytes Using a Novel Nano-Sized
Magnetic Beads Approach.

Szopa IM(1), Granica M(1), Bujak JK(1)(2), Łabędź A(1), Błaszczyk M(1), Paulos
CM(3), Majchrzak-Kuligowska K(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Physiological Sciences, Institute of Veterinary Medicine, Warsaw
University of Life Sciences, Warsaw, Poland.
(2)Department of Physics and Biophysics, Institute of Biology, Warsaw University 
of Life Sciences, Warsaw, Poland.
(3)Department of Surgery, Department of Microbiology and Immunology, Emory
University School of Medicine, Atlanta, GA, United States.

Expansion protocols for human T lymphocytes using magnetic beads, which serve as 
artificial antigen presenting cells (aAPCs), is well-studied. Yet, the efficacy
of magnetic beads for propagation and functionality of peripheral blood
lymphocytes (PBLs) isolated from companion dogs still remains limited. Domestic
dog models are important in immuno-oncology field. Thus, we built the platform
for induction of canine PBLs function, proliferation and biological activity
using nano-sized magnetic beads (termed as MicroBeads) coated with anti-canine
CD3 and CD28 antibodies. Herein we reveal that activation of canine PBLs via
MicroBeads induces a range of genes involved in immediate-early response to T
cell activation in dogs. Furthermore, canine T lymphocytes are effectively
activated by MicroBeads, as measured by cluster formation and induction of
activation marker CD25 on canine T cells as quickly as 24 h post stimulation.
Similar to human T cells, canine PBLs require lower activation signal strength
for efficient proliferation and expansion, as revealed by titration studies using
a range of MicroBeads in the culture. Additionally, the impact of temperature was
assessed in multiple stimulation settings, showing that both 37°C and 38.5°C are 
optimal for the expansion of canine T cells. In contrast to stimulation using
plant mitogen Concanavalin A (ConA), MicroBead-based activation did not increase 
activation-induced cell death. In turn, MicroBeads supported the propagation of T
cells with an effector memory phenotype that secreted substantial IL-2 and IFN-γ.
Thus, MicroBeads represent an accessible and affordable tool for conducting
immunological studies on domestic dog models. Similarities in inducing
intracellular signaling pathways further underscore the importance of this model 
in comparative medicine. Presented herein MicroBead-based expansion platforms for
canine PBLs may benefit adoptive immunotherapy in dogs and facilitate the design 
of next-generation clinical trials in humans.

Copyright © 2021 Szopa, Granica, Bujak, Łabędź, Błaszczyk, Paulos and
Majchrzak-Kuligowska.

DOI: 10.3389/fimmu.2021.604066 
PMCID: PMC7933476
PMID: 33679741 

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.

