
1. Polymers (Basel). 2021 Feb 23;13(4). pii: 665. doi: 10.3390/polym13040665.

Development and Characterization of Weft-Knitted Fabrics of Naturally Occurring
Polymer Fibers for Sustainable and Functional Textiles.

Ferrándiz M(1), Fages E(2), Rojas-Lema S(2), Ivorra-Martinez J(2), Gomez-Caturla 
J(2), Torres-Giner S(3).

Author information: 
(1)Textile Industry Research Association (AITEX), Plaza Emilio Sala 1, E-03801
Alcoy, Spain.
(2)Technological Institute of Materials (ITM), Universitat Politècnica de
València (UPV), Plaza Ferrándiz y Carbonell 1, 03801 Alcoy, Spain.
(3)Research Institute of Food Engineering for Development (IIAD), Universitat
Politècnica de València (UPV), Camino de Vera s/n, 46022 Valencia, Spain.

This study focuses on the potential uses in textiles of fibers of soy protein
(SP) and chitin, which are naturally occurring polymers that can be obtained from
agricultural and food processing by-products and wastes. The as-received natural 
fibers were first subjected to a three-step manufacturing process to develop
yarns that were, thereafter, converted into fabrics by weft knitting. Different
characterizations in terms of physical properties and comfort parameters were
carried out on the natural fibers and compared to waste derived fibers of coir
and also conventional cotton and cotton-based fibers, which are widely used in
the textile industry. The evaluation of the geometry and mechanical properties
revealed that both SP and chitin fibers showed similar fineness and tenacity
values than cotton, whereas coir did not achieve the expected properties to
develop fabrics. In relation to the moisture content, it was found that the SP
fibers outperformed the other natural fibers, which could successfully avoid
variations in the mechanical performance of their fabrics as well as impair the
growth of microorganisms. In addition, the antimicrobial activity of the natural 
fibers was assessed against different bacteria and fungi that are typically found
on the skin. The obtained results indicated that the fibers of chitin and also
SP, being the latter functionalized with biocides during the fiber-formation
process, showed a high antimicrobial activity. In particular, reductions of up to
100% and 60% were attained for the bacteria and fungi strains, respectively.
Finally, textile comfort was evaluated on the weft-knitted fabrics of the chitin 
and SP fibers by means of thermal and tactile tests. The comfort analysis
indicated that the thermal resistance of both fabrics was similar to that of
cotton, whereas their air permeability was higher, particularly for chitin due to
its higher fineness, which makes these natural fibers very promising for summer
clothes. Both the SP and chitin fabrics also presented relatively similar values 
of fullness and softness than the pure cotton fabric in terms of body feeling and
richness. However, the cotton/polyester fabric was the only one that achieved a
good range for uses in winter-autumn cloths. Therefore, the results of this work 
demonstrate that non-conventional chitin and SP fibers can be considered as
potential candidates to replace cotton fibers in fabrics for the textile industry
due to their high comfort and improved sustainability. Furthermore, these natural
fibers can also serve to develop novel functional textiles with antimicrobial
properties.

DOI: 10.3390/polym13040665 
PMCID: PMC7926964
PMID: 33672322 

