
1. Cell Mol Gastroenterol Hepatol. 2021 Mar 3. pii: S2352-345X(21)00051-5. doi:
10.1016/j.jcmgh.2021.02.013. [Epub ahead of print]

Helicobacter pylori-Induced Rev-erbα Fosters Gastric Bacteria Colonization by
Impairing Host Innate and Adaptive Defense.

Mao FY(1), Lv YP(1), Hao CJ(1), Teng YS(1), Liu YG(1), Cheng P(1), Yang SM(2),
Chen W(3), Liu T(4), Zou QM(1), Xie R(5), Xu JY(5), Zhuang Y(6).

Author information: 
(1)National Engineering Research Center of Immunological Products, Department of 
Microbiology and Biochemical Pharmacy, College of Pharmacy and Laboratory
Medicine, Third Military Medical University, Chongqing, China.
(2)Department of Gastroenterology, XinQiao Hospital, Third Military Medical
University, Chongqing, China.
(3)La Trobe Institute of Molecular Science, La Trobe University, Bundoora,
Australia.
(4)Department of Pharmacology, College of Pharmacy and Laboratory Medicine, Third
Military Medical University, Chongqing, China.
(5)Department of Gastroenterology, Affiliated Hospital of Zunyi Medical
University, Zunyi, China.
(6)National Engineering Research Center of Immunological Products, Department of 
Microbiology and Biochemical Pharmacy, College of Pharmacy and Laboratory
Medicine, Third Military Medical University, Chongqing, China; Department of
Gastroenterology, the Affiliated Hospital of Southwest Medical University,
Luzhou, China. Electronic address: yuanzhuang1983@yahoo.com.

BACKGROUND & AIMS: Rev-erbα represents a powerful transcriptional repressor
involved in immunity. However, the regulation, function, and clinical relevance
of Rev-erbα in Helicobacter pylori (H. pylori) infection are presently unknown.
METHODS: Rev-erbα was examined in gastric samples from H. pylori-infected
patients and mice. Gastric epithelial cells (GECs) were isolated and infected
with H. pylori for Rev-erbα regulation assays. Gastric tissues from Rev-erbα-/-
and wild-type (littermate control) mice or these mice adoptively transferred with
CD4+ T cells from IFN-γ-/- and wild-type mice, bone marrow chimera mice and mice 
with in vivo pharmacological activation or inhibition of Rev-erbα were examined
for bacteria colonization. GECs, CD45+CD11c-Ly6G-CD11b+CD68- myeloid cells and
CD4+ T cells were isolated, stimulated and/or cultured for Rev-erbα function
assays.
RESULTS: Rev-erbα was increased in gastric mucosa of H. pylori-infected patients 
and mice. H. pylori induced GECs to express Rev-erbα via the phosphorylated cagA 
that activated ERK signaling pathway to mediate NF-κB directly binding to
Rev-erbα promoter, which resulted in increased bacteria colonization within
gastric mucosa. Mechanistically, Rev-erbα in GECs not only directly suppressed
Reg3b and β-defensin-1 expression, which resulted in impaired bactericidal
effects against H. pylori of these antibacterial proteins in vitro and in vivo;
but also directly inhibited chemokine CCL21 expression, which led to decreased
gastric influx of CD45+CD11c-Ly6G-CD11b+CD68- myeloid cells by
CCL21-CCR7-dependent migration and, as a direct consequence, reduced bacterial
clearing capacity of H. pylori-specific Th1 cell response.
CONCLUSIONS: Overall, this study identifies a model involving Rev-erbα, which
collectively ensures gastric bacterial persistence by suppressing host gene
expression required for local innate and adaptive defense against H. pylori.

Copyright © 2021 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jcmgh.2021.02.013 
PMID: 33676046 

