
1. J Biol Chem. 2021 Mar 4:100516. doi: 10.1016/j.jbc.2021.100516. [Epub ahead of
print]

PKCα-mediated phosphorylation of the diacylglycerol kinase ζ MARCKS domain
switches cell migration modes by regulating interactions with Rac1 and RhoA.

Ard R(1), Maillet JC(1), Daher E(1), Phan M(1), Zinoviev R(1), Parks RJ(2), Gee
SH(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cellular and Molecular Medicine, University of Ottawa, 451 Smyth
Rd, Ottawa, Ontario, Canada, K1H 8M5; Centre for Neuromuscular Disease,
University of Ottawa, Ottawa, ON, Canada.
(2)Molecular Medicine Program, Ottawa Health Research Institute, 501 Smyth Road, 
Ottawa, ON K1H 8L6, Canada; Centre for Neuromuscular Disease, University of
Ottawa, Ottawa, ON, Canada;; Department of Biochemistry, Microbiology and
Immunology, University of Ottawa, Ottawa, ON, Canada.
(3)Department of Cellular and Molecular Medicine, University of Ottawa, 451 Smyth
Rd, Ottawa, Ontario, Canada, K1H 8M5; Centre for Neuromuscular Disease,
University of Ottawa, Ottawa, ON, Canada;. Electronic address:
stevegee@uottawa.ca.

Cells can switch between Rac1 (lamellipodia-based) and RhoA (blebbing-based)
migration modes but the molecular mechanisms regulating this shift are not fully 
understood. Diacylglycerol kinase ζ (DGKζ), which phosphorylates diacylglycerol
to yield phosphatidic acid, forms independent complexes with Rac1 and RhoA,
selectively dissociating each from their common inhibitor RhoGDI. DGKζ catalytic 
activity is required for Rac1 dissociation but is dispensable for RhoA
dissociation; instead, DGKζ stimulates RhoA release via a kinase-independent
scaffolding mechanism. The molecular determinants that mediate the selective
targeting of DGKζ to Rac1 or RhoA signaling complexes are unknown. Here, we show 
that protein kinase Cα (PKCα)-mediated phosphorylation of the DGKζ MARCKS domain 
increased DGKζ association with RhoA and decreased its interaction with Rac1. The
same modification also enhanced DGKζ interaction with the scaffold protein
syntrophin. Expression of a phosphomimetic DGKζ mutant stimulated membrane
blebbing in mouse embryonic fibroblasts and C2C12 myoblasts, which was augmented 
by inhibition of endogenous Rac1. DGKζ expression in differentiated C2 myotubes, 
which have low endogenous Rac1 levels, also induced substantial membrane blebbing
via the RhoA-ROCK pathway. These events were independent of DGKζ catalytic
activity, but dependent upon a functional C-terminal PDZ-binding motif. Rescue of
RhoA activity in DGKζ-null cells also required the PDZ-binding motif, suggesting 
syntrophin interaction is necessary for optimal RhoA activation. Collectively,
our results define a switch-like mechanism whereby DGKζ phosphorylation by PKCα
plays a role in the interconversion between Rac1 and RhoA signaling pathways that
underlie different cellular migration modes.

Copyright © 2021 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jbc.2021.100516 
PMID: 33676892 

