
1. Amino Acids. 2021 Mar 12. doi: 10.1007/s00726-021-02964-2. [Epub ahead of print]

Interaction of cationic surfactants with DPPC membranes: effect of a novel
Nα-benzoylated arginine-based compound.

Hermet M(1)(2), Elisa Fait M(1)(2), Vazquez RF(3)(2)(4), Mate S(3)(2), Daza
Millone MA(5)(2), Elena Vela M(5), García MT(6), Morcelle SR(7)(8), Bakas L(9).

Author information: 
(1)Centro de Investigación de Proteínas Vegetales (CIProVe), Departamento de
CienciasBiológicas, Facultad de Ciencias Exactas, Universidad Nacional de La
Plata (UNLP), Centro Asociado CICPBA, La Plata, Buenos Aires, Argentina.
(2)Centro Científico Tecnológico del Consejo Nacional de Investigaciones
Científicas (CONICET, CCT-La Plata), La Plata, Argentina.
(3)Instituto de Investigaciones Bioquímicas La Plata (INIBIOLP), CCT-La Plata,
CONICET, Facultad de Ciencias Médicas, Universidad Nacional de La Plata, La
Plata, Buenos Aires, Argentina.
(4)Departamento de Química, Facultad de Ciencias Exactas, Universidad Nacional de
La Plata, 47 y 115, 1900, La Plata, Argentina.
(5)Instituto de Investigaciones Fisicoquímicas Teóricas y Aplicadas (INIFTA),
CCT-La Plata, CONICET, Universidad Nacional de La Plata, La Plata, Buenos Aires, 
Argentina.
(6)Departamento de Tensioactivos y Nanotecnología, IQAC-CSIC, Barcelona, Spain.
(7)Centro de Investigación de Proteínas Vegetales (CIProVe), Departamento de
CienciasBiológicas, Facultad de Ciencias Exactas, Universidad Nacional de La
Plata (UNLP), Centro Asociado CICPBA, La Plata, Buenos Aires, Argentina.
morcelle@biol.unlp.edu.ar.
(8)Centro Científico Tecnológico del Consejo Nacional de Investigaciones
Científicas (CONICET, CCT-La Plata), La Plata, Argentina.
morcelle@biol.unlp.edu.ar.
(9)Centro de Investigación de Proteínas Vegetales (CIProVe), Departamento de
CienciasBiológicas, Facultad de Ciencias Exactas, Universidad Nacional de La
Plata (UNLP), Centro Asociado CICPBA, La Plata, Buenos Aires, Argentina.
lbakas@biol.unlp.edu.ar.

Cationic amino acid-based surfactants are known to interact with the lipid
bilayer of microorganism resulting in cell death through a disruption of the
membrane topology. To elucidate the interaction of a cationic surfactant
synthesized in our lab, investigations involving Nα-benzoyl-arginine decyl amide 
(Bz-Arg-NHC10), and model membranes composed by
1,2-dipalmitoyl-sn-glycero-3-phosphocholine (DPPC) were done. Bz-Arg-NHC10was
able to penetrate into DPPC monolayers up to a critical pressure of 59.6 mN m-1. 
Differential scanning calorimetry revealed that as the concentration of
Bz-Arg-NHC10 increased, the main transition temperature of DPPC slightly
decreased. Atomic force microscopy (AFM) in situ experiments performed on
supported DPPC bilayers on mica allowed monitoring the changes induced by
Bz-Arg-NHC10. DPPC bilayer patches were partially removed, mainly in borders and 
bilayer defects for 50 µM Bz-Arg-NHC10 solution. Increasing the concentration to 
100 µM resulted in a complete depletion of the supported bilayers. Surface
plasmon resonance (SPR) experiments, carried out with fully DPPC bilayers covered
chips, showed a net increase of the SPR signal, which can be explained by
Bz-Arg-NHC10 adsorption. When patchy DPPC bilayers were formed on the substrate, 
a SPR signal net decrease was obtained, which is consistent with the
phospholipids' removal observed in the AFM images. The results obtained suggest
that the presence of the benzoyl group attached to the polar head of our compound
would be the responsible of the increased antimicrobial activity against
gram-negative bacteria when compared with other arginine-based surfactants.

DOI: 10.1007/s00726-021-02964-2 
PMID: 33710434 

