
1. Front Immunol. 2021 Feb 24;12:630204. doi: 10.3389/fimmu.2021.630204. eCollection
2021.

HLA-Restriction of Human Treg Cells Is Not Required for Therapeutic Efficacy of
Low-Dose IL-2 in Humanized Mice.

Tyagi RK(1), Jacobse J(1)(2), Li J(3), Allaman MM(1), Otipoby KL(4), Sampson
ER(4), Wilson KT(1)(3)(5)(6)(7)(8), Goettel JA(1)(3)(5)(6)(7).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Gastroenterology, Hepatology and Nutrition, Department of
Medicine, Vanderbilt University Medical Center, Nashville, TN, United States.
(2)Willem-Alexander Children's Hospital, Department of Pediatrics, Leiden
University Medical Center, Leiden, Netherlands.
(3)Department of Pathology, Microbiology, and Immunology, Vanderbilt University
Medical Center, Nashville, TN, United States.
(4)Pandion Therapeutics, Immunology Department, Watertown, MA, United States.
(5)Program in Cancer Biology, Vanderbilt University School of Medicine,
Nashville, TN, United States.
(6)Vanderbilt Institute for Infection, Immunology, and Inflammation, Vanderbilt
University Medical Center, Nashville, TN, United States.
(7)Center for Mucosal Inflammation and Cancer, Vanderbilt University Medical
Center, Nashville, TN, United States.
(8)Veterans Affairs Tennessee Valley Healthcare System, Nashville, TN, United
States.

Regulatory T (Treg) cells are essential to maintain immune homeostasis in the
intestine and Treg cell dysfunction is associated with several inflammatory and
autoimmune disorders including inflammatory bowel disease (IBD). Efforts using
low-dose (LD) interleukin-2 (IL-2) to expand autologous Treg cells show
therapeutic efficacy for several inflammatory conditions. Whether LD IL-2 is an
effective strategy for treating patients with IBD is unknown. Recently, we
demonstrated that LD IL-2 was protective against experimental colitis in immune
humanized mice in which human CD4+ T cells were restricted to human leukocyte
antigen (HLA). Whether HLA restriction is required for human Treg cells to
ameliorate colitis following LD IL-2 therapy has not been demonstrated. Here, we 
show that treatment with LD IL-2 reduced 2,4,6-trinitrobenzensulfonic acid (TNBS)
colitis severity in NOD.PrkdcscidIl2rg-/- (NSG) mice reconstituted with human
CD34+ hematopoietic stem cells. These data demonstrate the utility of standard
immune humanized NSG mice as a pre-clinical model system to evaluate therapeutics
targeting human Treg cells to treat IBD.

Copyright © 2021 Tyagi, Jacobse, Li, Allaman, Otipoby, Sampson, Wilson and
Goettel.

DOI: 10.3389/fimmu.2021.630204 
PMCID: PMC7945590
PMID: 33717161 

Conflict of interest statement: ES and KO are employed by Pandion Therapeutics.
The authors declare that financial support for some of the humanized murine
studies was provided by Pandion Therapeutics. The funder was, in part, involved
in study design and procurement of mice. The data collection and analysis was not
a part of the funding provided. The authors shared the results of the study with 
Pandion and shared the manuscript draft for critiques prior to submission. The
remaining authors declare that the research was conducted in the absence of any
commercial or financial relationships that could be construed as a potential
conflict of interest.

