
1. Oral Oncol. 2021 Mar 13;116:105260. doi: 10.1016/j.oraloncology.2021.105260.
[Epub ahead of print]

All HPV-negative head and neck cancers are not the same: Analysis of the TCGA
dataset reveals that anatomical sites have distinct mutation, transcriptome,
hypoxia, and tumor microenvironment profiles.

Kim HAJ(1), Zeng PYF(1), Shaikh MH(1), Mundi N(1), Ghasemi F(2), Di Gravio E(1), 
Khan H(1), MacNeil D(3), Khan MI(1), Patel K(4), Mendez A(3), Yoo J(3), Fung
K(3), Lang P(5), Palma DA(3), Mymryk JS(6), Barrett JW(3), Boutros PC(7), Nichols
AC(8).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Otolaryngology - Head and Neck Surgery, University of Western
Ontario, London, Ontario, Canada.
(2)Department of General Surgery, University of Western Ontario, London, Ontario,
Canada.
(3)Department of Otolaryngology - Head and Neck Surgery, University of Western
Ontario, London, Ontario, Canada; Department of Oncology, University of Western
Ontario, London, Ontario, Canada.
(4)Department of Otolaryngology, Moffitt Cancer Center, Tampa, FL, USA.
(5)Department of Oncology, University of Western Ontario, London, Ontario,
Canada.
(6)Department of Otolaryngology - Head and Neck Surgery, University of Western
Ontario, London, Ontario, Canada; Department of Oncology, University of Western
Ontario, London, Ontario, Canada; Department of Microbiology & Immunology,
University of Western Ontario, London, Ontario, Canada.
(7)Department of Human Genetics, University of California, Los Angeles, CA, USA; 
Department of Urology, University of California, Los Angeles, CA, USA; Eli and
Edythe Broad Center of Regenerative Medicine and Stem Cell Research, University
of California, Los Angeles, CA, USA; Institute for Precision Health, University
of California, Los Angeles, CA, USA; Jonsson Comprehensive Cancer Centre,
University of California, Los Angeles, CA, USA.
(8)Department of Otolaryngology - Head and Neck Surgery, University of Western
Ontario, London, Ontario, Canada; Department of Oncology, University of Western
Ontario, London, Ontario, Canada. Electronic address: anthony.Nichols@lhsc.on.ca.

PURPOSE: Head and neck squamous cell carcinoma (HNSCC) affects various anatomical
sites, which often dictates whether the cancer is managed with primary surgery or
radiation. This study aimed to assess differences in single nucleotide variation 
(SNV), copy number, mRNA abundance, methylation, and tumor microenvironment (TME)
between HPV-negative oral cavity (OC), oropharyngeal (OPC), hypopharyngeal (HPC),
and laryngeal (LC) cancers within The Cancer Genome Atlas (TCGA).
METHODS: We downloaded the clinical information and molecular data for the TCGA
HNSCC cohort from the data portal and published literature. The TME was estimated
using mRNA abundance data. We conducted our analyses within the Bioconductor
statistical framework in the R environment. CNA and mRNA abundance results were
correlated and grouped with SNV results for downstream pathway analysis.
RESULTS: LC had a higher mutational burden than OC and OPC (p <10-4). LC tumors
were enriched in CSMD3, NSD1, DCHS2 and ANK2 SNVs, while OC tumors were enriched 
in CASP8 SNVs (FDR < 0.1). LCs were enriched for neuronal and glycosylation
pathways, while OCs were enriched for extracellular matrix pathways. B cells and 
endothelial cells were more abundant in LC while monocytes were more abundant in 
OC (FDR < 0.1). OPC was the most hypoxic, followed by OC then LC (FDR < 0.05). OC
had greater methylation of Hox genes than LC. Subsite analysis revealed that oral
tongue cancers had fewer CASP8 and FBN2 mutations and higher dendritic cell
abundance than other oral cavity cancers.
CONCLUSIONS: We identified significant genomic, transcriptional, and
microenvironmental differences between HPV-negative HNSCC. Further study is
warranted to determine if these findings portend differential response to
specific treatment modalities.

Copyright © 2021 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.oraloncology.2021.105260 
PMID: 33725617 

