
1. Parasit Vectors. 2021 Mar 16;14(1):157. doi: 10.1186/s13071-021-04659-9.

A U.S. isolate of Theileria orientalis, Ikeda genotype, is transmitted to cattle 
by the invasive Asian longhorned tick, Haemaphysalis longicornis.

Dinkel KD(#)(1), Herndon DR(#)(2), Noh SM(1)(2), Lahmers KK(3), Todd SM(3), Ueti 
MW(1)(2), Scoles GA(2)(4), Mason KL(2), Fry LM(5)(6).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Veterinary Microbiology & Pathology, Washington State
University, Pullman, WA, USA.
(2)United States, Department of Agriculture, Agricultural Research Service,
Animal Disease Research Unit, Pullman, WA, USA.
(3)Department of Biomedical Sciences and Pathobiology, Virginia-Maryland College 
of Veterinary Medicine, Blacksburg, VA, USA.
(4)United States Department of Agriculture, Agricultural Research Service,
Invasive Insect Biocontrol and Behavior Laboratory, Beltsville, MD, USA.
(5)Department of Veterinary Microbiology & Pathology, Washington State
University, Pullman, WA, USA. Lindsay.Fry@USDA.gov.
(6)United States, Department of Agriculture, Agricultural Research Service,
Animal Disease Research Unit, Pullman, WA, USA. Lindsay.Fry@USDA.gov.
(#)Contributed equally

BACKGROUND: Theileria orientalis is a tick-borne hemoparasite that causes anemia,
ill thrift, and death in cattle globally. The Ikeda strain of T. orientalis is
more virulent than other strains, leading to severe clinical signs and death of
up to 5% of affected animals. Within the Asia-Pacific region, where it affects
25% of Australian cattle, T. orientalis Ikeda has a significant economic impact
on the cattle industry. In 2017, T. orientalis Ikeda was detected in a cattle
herd in Albermarle County, Virginia, United States. Months earlier, the U.S. was 
alerted to the invasion of the Asian longhorned tick, Haemaphysalis longicornis, 
throughout the eastern U.S. Abundant H. longicornis ticks were identified on
cattle in the T. orientalis-affected herd in VA, and a subset of ticks from the
environment were PCR-positive for T. orientalis Ikeda. A strain of T. orientalis 
from a previous U.S. outbreak was not transmissible by H. longicornis; however,
H. longicornis is the primary tick vector of T. orientalis Ikeda in other regions
of the world. Thus, the objective of this study was to determine whether invasive
H. longicornis ticks in the U.S. are competent vectors of T. orientalis Ikeda.
METHODS: Nymphal H. longicornis ticks were fed on a splenectomized calf infected 
with the VA-U.S.-T. orientalis Ikeda strain. After molting, a subset of adult
ticks from this cohort were dissected, and salivary glands assayed for T.
orientalis Ikeda via qPCR. The remaining adult ticks from the group were allowed 
to feed on three calves. Calves were subsequently monitored for T. orientalis
Ikeda infection via blood smear cytology and PCR.
RESULTS: After acquisition feeding on a VA-U.S.-T. orientalis Ikeda-infected calf
as nymphs, a subset of molted adult tick salivary glands tested positive by qPCR 
for T. orientalis Ikeda. Adult ticks from the same cohort successfully
transmitted T. orientalis Ikeda to 3/3 naïve calves, each of which developed
parasitemia reaching 0.4-0.9%.
CONCLUSIONS: Our findings demonstrate that U.S. H. longicornis ticks are
competent vectors of the VA-U.S.-T. orientalis Ikeda strain. This data provides
important information for the U.S. cattle industry regarding the potential spread
of this parasite and the necessity of enhanced surveillance and control measures.

DOI: 10.1186/s13071-021-04659-9 
PMCID: PMC7962341
PMID: 33726815 

