
1. Nephrol Dial Transplant. 2021 Mar 21. pii: gfab070. doi: 10.1093/ndt/gfab070.
[Epub ahead of print]

The emerging role of the apelinergic system in kidney physiology and disease.

Janssens P(1)(2), Decuypere JP(1), Bammens B(3)(4), Llorens-Cortes C(5),
Vennekens R(6), Mekahli D(1)(7).

Author information: 
(1)PKD Research Group, Laboratory of Pediatrics, Department of Development and
Regeneration, KU Leuven, Leuven, Belgium.
(2)Department of Nephrology, University Hospitals Brussels, Brussels, Belgium.
(3)Department of Nephrology, Dialysis and Renal Transplantation, University
Hospitals Leuven, Leuven, Belgium.
(4)Nephrology and Renal Transplantation Research Group, Dept. of Microbiology,
Immunology and Transplantation, KU Leuven, Leuven, Belgium.
(5)Laboratory of Central Neuropeptides in the Regulation of Body Fluid
Homeostasis and Cardiovascular Functions, Center for Interdisciplinary Research
in Biology, Collège de France, INSERM U1050/CNRS UMR 7241, Paris, France.
(6)Laboratory of Ion Channel Research, Department of Cellular and Molecular
Medicine, VIB-KU Leuven Center for Brain and Disease, KU Leuven, Leuven, Belgium.
(7)Department of Pediatric Nephrology and Organ Transplantation, University
Hospitals Leuven, Leuven, Belgium.

The apelinergic system (AS) is a novel pleiotropic system with an essential role 
in renal and cardiovascular physiology and disease, including water homeostasis
and blood pressure regulation. It consists of two highly conserved peptide
ligands, apelin and apela, and a G-protein-coupled apelin receptor. The two
ligands have many isoforms and a short half-life, and exert both similar and
divergent effects. Vasopressin, apelin and their receptors colocalize in
hypothalamic regions essential for body fluid homeostasis and interact at the
central and renal levels to regulate water homeostasis and diuresis in inverse
directions. In addition, the AS and renin angiotensin system interact both
systemically and in the kidney, with implications for the cardiovascular system. 
A role for the AS in diverse pathological states, including disorders of sodium
and water balance, hypertension, heart failure, pre-eclampsia, acute kidney
injury, sepsis and diabetic nephropathy has recently been reported. Furthermore, 
several metabolically stable apelin analogs have been developed, with potential
applications in diverse diseases. We review here what is currently known about
the physiological functions of the AS, focusing on renal, cardiovascular and
metabolic homeostasis, and the role of the AS in associated diseases. We also
describe several hurdles and research opportunities worthy of the attention of
the nephrology community.

© The Author(s) 2021. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of ERA-EDTA.
All rights reserved. For permissions, please email: journals.permissions@oup.com.

DOI: 10.1093/ndt/gfab070 
PMID: 33744967 

