
1. J Cell Mol Med. 2021 Mar 22. doi: 10.1111/jcmm.16407. [Epub ahead of print]

A single-cell survey of the human glomerulonephritis.

Chen Z(1), Zhang T(2), Mao K(2), Shao X(1), Xu Y(1), Zhu M(1), Zhou H(1), Wang
Q(1), Li Z(1), Xie Y(1), Yuan X(3), Ying L(3), Zhang M(3), Hu J(4), Mou S(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Nephrology, Molecular Cell Laboratory for Kidney Disease, Ren Ji
Hospital, School of Medicine, Shanghai Jiao Tong University, Shanghai, China.
(2)Shanghai Institute of Immunology, Department of Microbiology and Immunology,
Shanghai Jiao Tong University School of Medicine (SJTU-SM), Shanghai, China.
(3)Transplantation Center of Ren Ji Hospital, School of Medicine, Shanghai Jiao
Tong University, Shanghai, China.
(4)Department of Nuclear Medicine, Ruijin Hospital, Shanghai Jiao Tong University
School of Medicine, Shanghai, China.

Glomerulonephritis is the one of the major causes of the end-stage kidney
disease, whereas the pathological process of glomerulonephritis is still not
completely understood. Single-cell RNA sequencing (scRNA-seq) emerges to be a
powerful tool to evaluate the full heterogeneity of kidney diseases. To reveal
cellular gene expression profiles of glomerulonephritis, we performed scRNA-seq
of 2 human kidney transplantation donor samples, 4 human glomerulonephritis
samples, 1 human malignant hypertension (MH) sample and 1 human chronic
interstitial nephritis (CIN) sample, all tissues were taken from the biopsy.
After filtering the cells with < 200 genes and > 10% mitochondria (MT) genes, the
resulting 14 932 cells can be divided into 20 cell clusters, consistently with
the previous report, in disease samples dramatic immune cells infiltration was
found, among which a proximal tubule (PT) subset characterized by wnt-β catenin
activation and a natural killer T (NKT) subset high expressing LTB were found.
Furthermore, in the cluster of the podocyte, three glomerulonephritis related
genes named FXYD5, CD74 and B2M were found. Compared with the mesangial of donor,
the gene CLIC1 and RPS26 were up-regulated in mesangial of IgA nephropathy(IgAN),
whereas the gene JUNB was up-regulated in podocyte of IgAN in comparison with
that of donor. Meanwhile, some membranous nephropathy (MN) high expressed genes
such as HLA-DRB5, HLA-DQA2, IFNG, CCL2 and NR4A2, which involve in highest
enrichment pathway, display the cellular-specific expression style, whereas
monocyte marker of lupus nephritis (LN) named TNFSF13B was also found and
interferon alpha/beta signalling pathway was enriched in B and NKT of LN
comparing with donor. By scRNA-seq, we first defined the podocyte markers of
glomerulonephritis and specific markers in IgA, MN and LN were found at cellular 
level. Furthermore, the critical role of interferon alpha/beta signalling pathway
was enriched in B and NKT of LN was declared.

© 2021 The Authors. Journal of Cellular and Molecular Medicine published by
Foundation for Cellular and Molecular Medicine and John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/jcmm.16407 
PMID: 33754492 

