
1. Eur J Hum Genet. 2021 Mar 22. doi: 10.1038/s41431-021-00845-6. [Epub ahead of
print]

Analysis of HLA gene polymorphisms in East Africans reveals evidence of gene flow
in two Semitic populations from Sudan.

Aamer W(1)(2)(3), Hassan HY(4), Nakaoka H(1)(2)(5), Hosomichi K(6), Jaeger M(7), 
Tahir H(8), Abdelraheem MH(9), Netea MG(7)(10), Inoue I(11)(12).

Author information: 
(1)Human Genetics Laboratory, Department of Genomics and Evolutionary Biology,
National Institute of Genetics, Mishima, Shizuoka, Japan.
(2)Department of Genetics, The Graduate University for Advanced Studies,
SOKENDAI, Mishima, Shizuoka, Japan.
(3)Human Genetics Department, Precision Medicine Program, Research Branch, Sidra 
Medicine, Doha, Qatar.
(4)Banoon ART and Cytogenetics Centre, Bahrain Defence Force Hospital, Riffa,
Kingdom of Bahrain.
(5)Department of Cancer Genome Research, Sasaki Institute, Sasaki Foundation,
Chiyoda-ku, Tokyo, Japan.
(6)Department of Bioinformatics and Genomics, Graduate School of Medical
Sciences, Kanazawa University, Kanazawa, Japan.
(7)Department of Internal Medicine and Radboudumc Center for Infectious Diseases,
Radboud University Medical Center, Nijmegen, The Netherlands.
(8)Public and Tropical Health Programmes, University of Medical Sciences and
Technology, Khartoum, Sudan.
(9)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, College of Medicine and Health
Sciences, Sultan Qaboos University, Muscat, Oman.
(10)Department for Genomics & Immunoregulation, Life and Medical Sciences
Institute (LIMES), University of Bonn, Bonn, Germany.
(11)Human Genetics Laboratory, Department of Genomics and Evolutionary Biology,
National Institute of Genetics, Mishima, Shizuoka, Japan. itinoue@nig.ac.jp.
(12)Department of Genetics, The Graduate University for Advanced Studies,
SOKENDAI, Mishima, Shizuoka, Japan. itinoue@nig.ac.jp.

Sudan, a northeastern African country, is characterized by high levels of
cultural, linguistic, and genetic diversity, which is believed to be affected by 
continuous migration from neighboring countries. Consistent with such demographic
effect, genome-wide SNP data revealed a shared ancestral component among Sudanese
Afro-Asiatic speaking groups and non-African populations, mainly from West Asia. 
Although this component is shared among all Afro-Asiatic speaking groups, the
extent of this sharing in Semitic groups, such as Sudanese Arab, is still
unknown. Using genotypes of six polymorphic human leukocyte antigen (HLA) genes
(i.e., HLA-A, -C, -B, -DRB1, -DQB1, and -DPB1), we examined the genetic structure
of eight East African ethnic groups with origins in Sudan, South Sudan, and
Ethiopia. We identified informative HLA alleles using principal component
analysis, which revealed that the two Semitic groups (Gaalien and Shokrya)
constituted a distinct cluster from the other Afro-Asiatic speaking groups in
this study. The HLA alleles that distinguished Semitic Arabs co-exist in the same
extended HLA haplotype, and those alleles are in strong linkage disequilibrium.
Interestingly, we find the four-locus haplotype
"C*12:02-B*52:01-DRB1*15:02-DQB1*06:01" exclusively in non-African populations
and it is widely spread across Asia. The identification of this haplotype
suggests a gene flow from Asia, and likely these haplotypes were brought to
Africa through back migration from the Near East. These findings will be of
interest to biomedical and anthropological studies that examine the demographic
history of northeast Africa.

DOI: 10.1038/s41431-021-00845-6 
PMID: 33753913 

