
1. Glycobiology. 2021 Mar 20. pii: cwab019. doi: 10.1093/glycob/cwab019. [Epub ahead
of print]

Re-expression of glucuronyl C5-epimerase in the mutant MEF cells increases
heparan sulfate epimerization but has no influence on the Golgi localization and 
enzymatic activity of 2-O-sulfotransferase.

Cui H(1), Wang Z(1), Zhang T(2), Li JP(3), Fang J(3)(4).

Author information: 
(1)Key Laboratory of Functional Small Organic Molecule, Ministry of Education and
Jiangxi's Key Laboratory of Green Chemistry, College of Life Science, Jiangxi
Normal University, Nanchang 330022, China.
(2)Division of Chemistry and Analytical Science, National Institute of Metrology,
Beijing 100029, China.
(3)Department of Medical Biochemistry and Microbiology, SciLifeLab Uppsala, The
Biomedical Center, University of Uppsala, Uppsala SE-751 23, Sweden.
(4)GlycoNovo Technologies Co., Ltd., Shanghai 201203, China.

Heparan sulfate (HS) is a linear and complex polysaccharide that modulates the
biological activities through protein recognition and interaction. Evidence
indicates that protein-binding properties of HS are largely dependent on
distinctive sulfation and epimerization patterns that are modified by a series of
Golgi-localized enzymes. In particular, the glucuronyl C5-epimerase (Hsepi)
converts D-glucuronic acid residues to L-iduronic acid, and 2-O-sulfotransferase 
(2OST) catalyzes sulfation at C2 position of IdoA and rarely GlcA residues. Mice 
lacking both Hsepi and 2OST display multiple development defects, indicating the 
importance of IdoA in HS. Here, to gain greater insights of HS structure-function
relationships, as well as a better understanding of the regulatory mechanisms of 
Hsepi and 2OST, the fine structure and cellular signaling functions of HS were
investigated after restoration of Hsepi in the mutant mouse embryonic fibroblast 
cells. Introduction of Hsepi into the Hsepi mutant MEF cells led to robustly
increased proportion of IdoA residues, which rescued the cell signaling in
responding to FGF2. However, we found that Hsepi knockout had no influence on
either cellular transportation or enzymatic activity of 2OST in the MEF cells,
which is not in accord with the findings reported, suggesting that the enzymatic 
activity and cellular transportation of 2OST and Hsepi might be differently
regulated.

© The Author(s) 2021. Published by Oxford University Press. All rights reserved. 
For permissions, please e-mail: journals.permissions@oup.com.

DOI: 10.1093/glycob/cwab019 
PMID: 33755115 

