
1. Arch Microbiol. 2021 Mar 27. doi: 10.1007/s00203-021-02289-4. [Epub ahead of
print]

Colistin-resistant Klebsiella pneumoniae bloodstream infection: old drug, bad
bug.

Ben-Chetrit E(1)(2), Mc Gann P(#)(3), Maybank R(3), Stam J(3), Assous MV(4), Katz
DE(5)(6).

Author information: 
(1)Shaare Zedek Medical Center, Department of Infectious Diseases, Jerusalem,
Israel.
(2)Faculty of Medicine, Hebrew University of Jerusalem, Jerusalem, Israel.
(3)Multidrug-Resistant Organism Repository and Surveillance Network (MRSN),
Walter Reed Army Institute of Research, Silver Spring, MD, USA.
(4)Shaare Zedek Medical Center, Department of Microbiology, Jerusalem, Israel.
(5)Faculty of Medicine, Hebrew University of Jerusalem, Jerusalem, Israel.
dekatz1@gmail.com.
(6)Shaare Zedek Medical Center, Division of Internal Medicine, Jerusalem, Israel.
dekatz1@gmail.com.
(#)Contributed equally

Multi-drug-resistant (MDR) Enterobacteriaceae pose a global threat to
hospitalized patients. We report a series of colistin-resistant Klebsiella
pneumoniae blood isolates from Israel and explore their resistance mechanisms
using whole genome sequencing (WGS). Patients with colistin-resistant K.
pneumoniae bloodstream infection (BSI) were identified during the period between 
2006 and 2018. Demographic and clinical data were collected, and antibiotic
susceptibility testing (AST) was performed using three commercial platforms. Long
and short read sequencing were performed on a PacBio RS II (Pacific Biosciences) 
and an Illumina Miseq (Illumina), respectively. Thirteen patients with
colistin-resistant K. pneumoniae BSI were identified, and seven isolates from
seven different patients were successfully revived. Patient records indicated
that five of the patients were previously treated with colistin. AST indicated
that six of the seven isolates were colistin resistant and four of these isolates
were resistant to carbapenems. WGS assigned the isolates to four distinct
clusters that corresponded to in silico-derived multi-locus sequence types
(MLST). Three isolates carried blaKPC-3 on two different plasmids and one
carried blaOXA-48 on a novel IncL/M plasmid. All colistin-resistant isolates
carried a variety of different mutations that inactivated the mgrB gene. We
report the first comprehensive analysis of a series of colistin-resistant K.
pneumoniae from Israel. A diverse set of isolates were obtained and colistin
resistance was found to be attributed to different mechanisms that ablated
the mgrB gene. Notably, carbapenemase genes were identified in four isolates and 
were carried on novel plasmids.

DOI: 10.1007/s00203-021-02289-4 
PMID: 33774687 

