
1. J Biol Chem. 2021 Mar 25:100593. doi: 10.1016/j.jbc.2021.100593. [Epub ahead of
print]

PIM-induced phosphorylation of Notch3 promotes breast cancer tumorigenicity in a 
CSL-independent fashion.

Landor SKJ(1), Santio NM(2), Eccleshall WB(3), Paramonov VM(4), Gagliani EK(5),
Hall D(5), Jin SB(6), Dahlström KM(7), Salminen TA(7), Rivero-Müller A(8),
Lendahl U(6), Kovall RA(5), Koskinen PJ(9), Sahlgren C(10).

Author information: 
(1)Faculty of Science and Engineering/ Cell Biology, Åbo Akademi University,
Turku, Finland; Turku Bioscience, University of Turku and Åbo Akademi University,
Turku, Finland.
(2)Department of Biology, University of Turku, Finland.
(3)Faculty of Science and Engineering/ Cell Biology, Åbo Akademi University,
Turku, Finland; Turku Bioscience, University of Turku and Åbo Akademi University,
Turku, Finland; Department of Biology, University of Turku, Finland.
(4)Faculty of Science and Engineering/ Cell Biology, Åbo Akademi University,
Turku, Finland; Turku Bioscience, University of Turku and Åbo Akademi University,
Turku, Finland; Institute of Biomedicine, Research Centre for Integrative
Physiology and Pharmacology, University of Turku, Finland.
(5)Department of Molecular Genetics, Biochemistry, and Microbiology, University
of Cincinnati, OH, USA.
(6)Department of Cell and Molecular Biology, Karolinska Institute, Stockholm,
Sweden.
(7)Structural Bioinformatics Laboratory, Biochemistry, Faculty of Science and
Engineering, Åbo Akademi, Turku, Finland.
(8)Faculty of Science and Engineering/ Cell Biology, Åbo Akademi University,
Turku, Finland; Department of Biology, University of Turku, Finland.
(9)Department of Biology, University of Turku, Finland. Electronic address:
paivi.koskinen@utu.fi.
(10)Faculty of Science and Engineering/ Cell Biology, Åbo Akademi University,
Turku, Finland; Turku Bioscience, University of Turku and Åbo Akademi University,
Turku, Finland; Department of Biomedical Engineering, Institute for Complex
Molecular Systems, Eindhoven University of Technology, Eindhoven, The
Netherlands. Electronic address: csahlgre@abo.fi.

Dysregulation of the developmentally important Notch signaling pathway is
implicated in several types of cancer, including breast cancer. However, the
specific roles and regulation of the four different Notch receptors have remained
elusive. We have previously reported that the oncogenic PIM kinases phosphorylate
Notch1 and Notch3. Phosphorylation of Notch1 within the second nuclear
localization sequence of its intracellular domain (ICD) enhances its
transcriptional activity and tumorigenicity. In this study, we analyzed Notch3
phosphorylation and its functional impact. Unexpectedly, we observed that the PIM
target sites are not conserved between Notch1 and Notch3. Notch3 ICD is
phosphorylated within the RAM domain, which is essential for formation of a
transcriptionally active complex with the DNA-binding protein CSL. Through
molecular modeling, x-ray crystallography and isothermal titration calorimetry,
we demonstrate that phosphorylation of Notch3 ICD sterically hinders its
interaction with CSL, and thereby inhibits its CSL-dependent transcriptional
activity. Surprisingly however, phosphorylated Notch3 ICD still maintains
tumorigenic potential in breast cancer cells under estrogenic conditions, which
support PIM expression. Taken together, our data indicate that PIM kinases
modulate the signaling output of different Notch paralogs by targeting distinct
protein domains, and thereby promote breast cancer tumorigenesis via both
CSL-dependent and independent mechanisms.

Copyright © 2021 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jbc.2021.100593 
PMID: 33775697 

Conflict of interest statement: Conflict of Interest: UL holds research grants
from Merck KGaA, no personal remuneration, other authors declare no conflicts of 
interest in regards to this manuscript.

