
1. PLoS One. 2021 Apr 1;16(4):e0249354. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0249354.
eCollection 2021.

Partial DnaK protein expression from Coxiella-like endosymbiont of Rhipicephalus 
annulatus tick.

Nooroong P(1), Trinachartvanit W(1), Baimai V(1), Anuracpreeda P(2), Ahantarig
A(1)(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biology, Biodiversity Research Cluster, Faculty of Science,
Mahidol University, Bangkok, Thailand.
(2)Institute of Molecular Biosciences, Mahidol University, Salaya, Nakhon Pathom,
Thailand.
(3)Center of Excellence for Vectors and Vector-Borne Diseases, Faculty of
Science, Mahidol University, Salaya, Nakhon Pathom, Thailand.

Q fever is one of the most important zoonotic diseases caused by the obligate
intracellular bacteria, Coxiella burnetii. This bacterial infection has been
frequently reported in both humans and animals, especially ruminants. Ticks are
important ectoparasite and serve as reservoir hosts of Coxiella-like
endosymbionts (CLEs). In this study, we have attempted to express
chaperone-coding genes from CLEs of Rhipicephalus annulatus ticks collected
fromcow path. The partial DnaK coding sequence has been amplified and expressed
by Escherichia coli. Amino acid sequences have been analyzed by MS-MS
spectrometry and the UniProt database. Despites nucleotide sequences indicating
high nucleotide variation and diversity, many nucleotide substitutions are
synonymous. In addition, amino acid substitutions compensate for the
physicochemical properties of the original amino acids. Immune Epitope Database
and Analysis Resource (IEDB-AR) was employed to indicate the antigenicity of the 
partial DnaK protein and predict the epitopes of B-and T-cells. Interestingly,
some predicted HLA-A and B alleles of the MHC-I and HLA-DR alleles belonging to
MHC-II were similar to T-cell responses to C. burnetii in Q fever patients.
Therefore, the partial DnaK protein of CLE from R. annulatus could be considered 
a vaccine candidate and immunogenic marker with future prospects.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0249354 
PMCID: PMC8016282
PMID: 33793664 

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have declared that no competing
interests exist.

