
1. Front Microbiol. 2021 Mar 16;12:630694. doi: 10.3389/fmicb.2021.630694.
eCollection 2021.

Modulation of Gene Expression in Actinobacteria by Translational Modification of 
Transcriptional Factors and Secondary Metabolite Biosynthetic Enzymes.

Martín JF(1), Liras P(1), Sánchez S(2).

Author information: 
(1)Área de Microbiología, Departamento de Biología Molecular, Universidad de
León, León, Spain.
(2)Instituto de Investigaciones Biomédicas, Universidad Nacional Autónoma de
México, México, Mexico.

Different types of post-translational modifications are present in bacteria that 
play essential roles in bacterial metabolism modulation. Nevertheless, limited
information is available on these types of modifications in actinobacteria,
particularly on their effects on secondary metabolite biosynthesis. Recently,
phosphorylation, acetylation, or phosphopantetheneylation of transcriptional
factors and key enzymes involved in secondary metabolite biosynthesis have been
reported. There are two types of phosphorylations involved in the control of
transcriptional factors: (1) phosphorylation of sensor kinases and transfer of
the phosphate group to the receiver domain of response regulators, which alters
the expression of regulator target genes. (2) Phosphorylation systems involving
promiscuous serine/threonine/tyrosine kinases that modify proteins at several
amino acid residues, e.g., the phosphorylation of the global nitrogen regulator
GlnR. Another post-translational modification is the acetylation at the epsilon
amino group of lysine residues. The protein acetylation/deacetylation controls
the activity of many short and long-chain acyl-CoA synthetases, transcriptional
factors, key proteins of bacterial metabolism, and enzymes for the biosynthesis
of non-ribosomal peptides, desferrioxamine, streptomycin, or phosphinic
acid-derived antibiotics. Acetyltransferases catalyze acetylation reactions
showing different specificity for the acyl-CoA donor. Although it functions as
acetyltransferase, there are examples of malonylation, crotonylation,
succinylation, or in a few cases acylation activities using bulky acyl-CoA
derivatives. Substrates activation by nucleoside triphosphates is one of the
central reactions inhibited by lysine acetyltransferases.
Phosphorylation/dephosphorylation or acylation/deacylation reactions on global
regulators like PhoP, GlnR, AfsR, and the carbon catabolite regulator glucokinase
strongly affects the expression of genes controlled by these regulators. Finally,
a different type of post-translational protein modification is the
phosphopantetheinylation, catalized by phosphopantetheinyl transferases
(PPTases). This reaction is essential to modify those enzymes requiring
phosphopantetheine groups like non-ribosomal peptide synthetases, polyketide
synthases, and fatty acid synthases. Up to five PPTases are present in S.
tsukubaensis and S. avermitilis. Different PPTases modify substrate proteins in
the PCP or ACP domains of tacrolimus biosynthetic enzymes. Directed mutations of 
genes encoding enzymes involved in the post-translational modification is a
promising tool to enhance the production of bioactive metabolites.

Copyright © 2021 Martín, Liras and Sánchez.

DOI: 10.3389/fmicb.2021.630694 
PMCID: PMC8007912
PMID: 33796086 

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.

