
1. Crit Rev Food Sci Nutr. 2021 Apr 5:1-27. doi: 10.1080/10408398.2021.1903382.
[Epub ahead of print]

Endocrine disrupting chemicals and breast cancer: a systematic review of
epidemiological studies.

Wan MLY(1)(2), Co VA(1), El-Nezami H(1)(3).

Author information: 
(1)Faculty of Science, School of Biological Sciences, The University of Hong
Kong, Pokfulam, Hong Kong S.A.R.
(2)Department of Microbiology, Immunology and Glycobiology, Institute of
Laboratory Medicine, Lund University, Lund, Sweden.
(3)Institute of Public Health and Clinical Nutrition, University of Eastern
Finland, Kuopio, Finland.

BACKGROUND: Endocrine-disrupting compounds (EDCs) are ubiquitous substances that 
are found in our everyday lives, including pesticides, plasticizers,
pharmaceutical agents, personal care products, and also in food products and food
packaging. Increasing epidemiological evidence suggest that EDCs may affect the
development or progression of breast cancer and consequently lead to lifelong
harmful health consequences, especially when exposure occurs during early life in
humans. Yet so far no appraisal of the available evidence has been conducted on
this topic.
OBJECTIVE: To systematically review all the available epidemiological studies
about the association of the levels of environmental exposures of EDCs with
breast cancer risk.
METHODS: The search was performed in accordance with the PRISMA guidelines. We
retrieved articles from PubMed (MEDLINE) until 10 March 2021. The key words used 
in this research were: "Endocrine disruptor(s)" OR "Endocrine disrupting
chemical(s)" OR any of the EDCs mentioned below AND "Breast cancer" to locate all
relevant articles published. We included only cohort studies and case-control
studies. All relevant articles were accessed in full text and were evaluated and 
summarized in tables.
RESULTS: We identified 131 studies that met the search criteria and were included
in this systematic review. EDCs reviewed herein included pesticides (e.g.
p,p'-dichlorodiphenyltrichloroethane (DDT), p,p'-dichlorodiphenyldichloroethylene
(DDE), atrazine, 2,3,7,8-tetrachloridibenzo-p-dioxin (TCDD or dioxin)), synthetic
chemicals (e.g. bisphenol A (BPA), phthalates, per- and polyfluoroalkyl
substances (PFAS), parabens, polychlorinated biphenyls (PCBs), polybrominated
diphenyl ethers (PBDEs), contraceptive pills), phytoestrogens (e.g. genistein,
resveratrol), and certain mycotoxins (e.g. zearalenone). Most studies assessed
environmental EDCs exposure via biomarker measurements.
CONCLUSION: We identified certain EDC exposures could potentially elevate the
risk of breast cancer. As majority of EDCs are highly persistent in the
environment and bio-accumulative, it is essential to assess the long-term impacts
of EDC exposures, especially multi-generational and transgenerational. Also,
since food is often a major route of exposure to EDCs, well-designed exposure
assessments of potential EDCs in food and food packing are necessary and their
potential link to breast cancer development need to be carefully evaluated for
subsequent EDC policy making and regulations.

DOI: 10.1080/10408398.2021.1903382 
PMID: 33819127 

