
1. Biomedicines. 2021 Mar 26;9(4). pii: 334. doi: 10.3390/biomedicines9040334.

Antibacterial and Anti-Biofilm Activity of Omega-3 Polyunsaturated Fatty Acids
against Periprosthetic Joint Infections-Isolated Multi-Drug Resistant Strains.

Coraça-Huber DC(1), Steixner S(1), Wurm A(2), Nogler M(1).

Author information: 
(1)Research Laboratory for Biofilms and Implant Associated Infections (BIOFILM
LAB), Experimental Orthopedics, University Hospital for Orthopedics and
Traumatology, Medical University of Innsbruck, Peter-Mayr-Strasse 4b, Room 204,
6020 Innsbruck, Austria.
(2)University Hospital for Orthopedics and Traumatology, Medical University of
Innsbruck, Anichstraße 35, 6020 Innsbruck, Austria.

Background: Implantable medical devices, such as prosthetics, catheters, and
several other devices, have revolutionized medicine, but they increase the
infection risk. In previous decades, commercially available antibiotics lost
their activity against coagulase-negative Staphylococci (CoNS) and several other 
microorganisms. Docosahexaenoic acid (DHA) and eicosapentaenoic acid (EPA) are
the two major omega-3 polyunsaturated fatty acids (ω-3 PUFAs) with antimicrobial 
properties. Materials and Methods: In this study, we tested the EPA and the DHA
for its antibacterial and anti-biofilm activity in vitro against Staphylococcus
epidermidis, Staphylococcus aureus, and different CoNS as reference strains and
isolated from patients undergoing orthopedic treatment for implant infections.
The tests were carried out with the strains in planktonic and biofilm form.
Cytotoxicity assay was carried out with EPA and DHA using human gingival
fibroblasts HGF-1. Results: The highest concentration of EPA and DHA promoted the
complete killing of S. epidermidis 1457 and S. aureus ATCC 25923 in planktonic
form. The fatty acids showed low activity against P. aeruginosa. EPA and DHA
completely killed or significantly reduced the count of planktonic bacteria of
the patient isolated strains. When incubated with media enriched with EPA and
DHA, the biofilm formation was significantly reduced on S. epidermidis 1457 and
not present on S. aureus ATCC 25923. The reduction or complete killing were also 
observed with the clinical isolates. The pre-formed biofilms showed reduction of 
the cell counting after treatment with EPA and DHA. Conclusion: In this study,
the ω-3 PUFAs EPA and DHA showed antimicrobial and anti-biofilm activity in vitro
against S. aureus, S. epidermidis, and P. aeruginosa, as well as against
multi-drug resistant S. aureus and CoNS strains isolated from patients undergoing
periprosthetic joint infections (PJI) treatment. Higher concentrations of the
fatty acids showed killing activity on planktonic cells and inhibitory activity
of biofilm formation. Although both substances showed antimicrobial activity, EPA
showed better results in comparison with DHA. In addition, when applied on human 
gingival fibroblasts in vitro, EPA and DHA showed a possible protective effect on
cells cultured in medium enriched with ethanol. Further studies are required to
confirm the antimicrobial activity of EPA and DHA against multi-drug resistant
strains and pan-drug resistant strains.

DOI: 10.3390/biomedicines9040334 
PMID: 33810261 

