
1. Immunology. 2021 Apr 4. doi: 10.1111/imm.13335. [Epub ahead of print]

Hypoxia-inducible factor-1 drives divergent immunomodulatory functions in the
pathogenesis of autoimmune diseases.

Islam SMT(1), Won J(2), Khan M(1), Mannie MD(3), Singh I(1)(4).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Medical University of South Carolina, Charleston,
SC, USA.
(2)Department of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine, Medical University of South
Carolina, Charleston, SC, USA.
(3)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, Brody School of Medicine, East
Carolina University, Greenville, NC, USA.
(4)Ralph H. Johnson VA Medical Center, Charleston, SC, USA.

Hypoxia-inducible factor-1 (HIF-1) is a heterodimeric (HIF-1α/ HIF-1β)
transcription factor in which the oxygen-sensitive HIF-1α subunit regulates gene 
transcription to mediate adaptive tissue responses to hypoxia. HIF-1 is a key
mediator in both regulatory and pathogenic immune responses because ongoing
inflammation in localized tissues causes increased oxygen consumption and
consequent hypoxia within the inflammatory lesions. In autoimmune diseases, HIF-1
plays complex and divergent roles within localized inflammatory lesions by
orchestrating a critical immune interplay sponsoring the pathogenesis of the
disease. In this review, we have summarized the role of HIF-1 in lymphoid and
myeloid immunomodulation in autoimmune diseases. HIF-1 drives inflammation by
controlling the Th17/Treg /Tr1 balance through the tipping of the differentiation
of CD4+ T cells in favor of proinflammatory Th17 cells while suppressing the
development of anti-inflammatory Treg /Tr1 cells. On the other hand, HIF-1 plays 
a protective role by facilitating the expression of anti-inflammatory cytokine
IL10 in and expansion of CD1dhi CD5+ B cells, known as regulatory B cells or B10 
cells. Apart from lymphoid cells, HIF-1 also controls the activation of
macrophages, neutrophils, and dendritic cells, thus eventually further
influencing the activation and development of effector/regulatory T cells by
facilitating the creation of a pro/anti-inflammatory micro-environment within the
auto-inflammatory lesions. Based on the critical immunomodulatory roles that
HIF-1 plays, this master transcription factor seems to be a potent druggable
target for the treatment of autoimmune diseases.

This article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1111/imm.13335 
PMID: 33813735 

