
1. Front Immunol. 2021 Mar 11;12:612846. doi: 10.3389/fimmu.2021.612846. eCollection
2021.

A Clot Twist: Extreme Variation in Coagulotoxicity Mechanisms in Mexican
Neotropical Rattlesnake Venoms.

Seneci L(1)(2), Zdenek CN(1), Chowdhury A(1)(3), Rodrigues CFB(1)(4), Neri-Castro
E(5), Bénard-Valle M(5), Alagón A(5), Fry BG(1).

Author information: 
(1)Venom Evolution Lab, School of Biological Sciences, University of Queensland, 
St Lucia, QLD, Australia.
(2)Institute of Biology Leiden (IBL), Leiden University, Leiden, Netherlands.
(3)Department of Biochemistry and Microbiology, North South University, Dhaka,
Bangladesh.
(4)Laboratório de Herpetologia, Instituto Butantan, São Paulo, Brazil.
(5)Instituto de Biotecnología, Universidad Autónoma de México, Cuernavaca,
Mexico.

Rattlesnakes are a diverse clade of pit vipers (snake family Viperidae, subfamily
Crotalinae) that consists of numerous medically significant species. We used
validated in vitro assays measuring venom-induced clotting time and strength of
any clots formed in human plasma and fibrinogen to assess the coagulotoxic
activity of the four medically relevant Mexican rattlesnake species Crotalus
culminatus, C. mictlantecuhtli, C. molossus, and C. tzabcan. We report the first 
evidence of true procoagulant activity by Neotropical rattlesnake venom in
Crotalus culminatus. This species presented a strong ontogenetic coagulotoxicity 
dichotomy: neonates were strongly procoagulant via Factor X activation, whereas
adults were pseudo-procoagulant in that they converted fibrinogen into weak,
unstable fibrin clots that rapidly broke down, thereby likely contributing to net
anticoagulation through fibrinogen depletion. The other species did not activate 
clotting factors or display an ontogenetic dichotomy, but depleted fibrinogen
levels by cleaving fibrinogen either in a destructive (non-clotting) manner or
via a pseudo-procoagulant mechanism. We also assessed the neutralization of these
venoms by available antivenom and enzyme-inhibitors to provide knowledge for the 
design of evidence-based treatment strategies for envenomated patients. One of
the most frequently used Mexican antivenoms (Bioclon Antivipmyn®) failed to
neutralize the potent procoagulant toxic action of neonate C. culminatus venom,
highlighting limitations in snakebite treatment for this species. However, the
metalloprotease inhibitor Prinomastat substantially thwarted the procoagulant
venom activity, while 2,3-dimercapto-1-propanesulfonic acid (DMPS) was much less 
effective. These results confirm that venom-induced Factor X activation (a
procoagulant action) is driven by metalloproteases, while also suggesting
Prinomastat as a more promising potential adjunct treatment than DMPS for this
species (with the caveat that in vivo studies are necessary to confirm this
potential clinical use). Conversely, the serine protease inhibitor
4-(2-aminoethyl)benzenesulfonyl fluoride hydrochloride (AEBSF) inhibited the
direct fibrinogen cleaving actions of C. mictlantecuhtli venom, thereby revealing
that the pseudo-procoagulant action is driven by kallikrein-type serine
proteases. Thus, this differential ontogenetic variation in coagulotoxicity
patterns poses intriguing questions. Our results underscore the need for further 
research into Mexican rattlesnake venom activity, and also highlights potential
limitations of current antivenom treatments.

Copyright © 2021 Seneci, Zdenek, Chowdhury, Rodrigues, Neri-Castro, Bénard-Valle,
Alagón and Fry.

DOI: 10.3389/fimmu.2021.612846 
PMCID: PMC8011430
PMID: 33815366 

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.

