
1. J Sleep Res. 2021 Apr 4:e13296. doi: 10.1111/jsr.13296. [Epub ahead of print]

The Swiss Primary Hypersomnolence and Narcolepsy Cohort study (SPHYNCS): Study
protocol for a prospective, multicentre cohort observational study.

Dietmann A(1), Wenz E(1)(2), van der Meer J(1), Ringli M(1), Warncke JD(1),
Edwards E(1), Schmidt MH(1), Bernasconi CA(1), Nirkko A(3), Strub M(4), Miano
S(5), Manconi M(5), Acker J(6), von Manitius S(7), Baumann CR(8), Valko PO(8),
Yilmaz B(9)(10), Brunner AD(11), Tzovara A(12)(13)(14), Zhang Z(15), Largiadèr
CR(16), Tafti M(17), Latorre D(18), Sallusto F(18)(19), Khatami R(1)(15),
Bassetti CLA(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neurology, Inselspital, Bern University Hospital and University 
of Bern, Bern, Switzerland.
(2)Graduate School for Health Sciences, University of Bern, Bern, Switzerland.
(3)Neurozentrum Luzern, Luzern, Switzerland.
(4)Zentrum für Schlafmedizin Basel, Basel, Switzerland.
(5)Sleep and Epilepsy Center, Neurocenter of the Southern Switzerland, Regional
Hospital (EOC) of Lugano, Lugano, Switzerland.
(6)Clinic for Sleep Medicine, Bad Zurzach, Switzerland.
(7)Department of Neurology, Kantonsspital St. Gallen St, Gallen, Switzerland.
(8)Department of Neurology, University Hospital Zurich, Zurich, Switzerland.
(9)Department of Visceral Surgery and Medicine, Bern University Hospital,
University of Bern, Bern, Switzerland.
(10)Maurice Müller Laboratories, Department for Biomedical Research, University
of Bern, Bern, Switzerland.
(11)Department of Proteomics and Signal Transduction, Max Planck Institute of
Biochemistry, Martinsried, Germany.
(12)Institute of Computer Science, University of Bern, Bern, Switzerland.
(13)Department of Neurology, Sleep Wake Epilepsy Center, NeuroTec, Inselspital,
Bern University Hospital, University of Bern, Bern, Switzerland.
(14)Helen Wills Neuroscience Institute, University of California, Berkeley, CA,
USA.
(15)Clinic Barmelweid, Center for Sleep Medicine and Sleep Research, Barmelweid, 
Switzerland.
(16)Department of Clinical Chemistry, Inselspital, Bern University Hospital and
University of Bern, Bern, Switzerland.
(17)Department of Biomedical Science, Faculty of Biology and Medicine, University
of Lausanne, Lausanne, Switzerland.
(18)Institute of Microbiology, ETH Zurich, Zurich, Switzerland.
(19)Institute for Research in Biomedicine, Faculty of Biomedical Sciences, USI,
Bellinzona, Switzerland.

Narcolepsy type 1 (NT1) is a disorder with well-established markers and a
suspected autoimmune aetiology. Conversely, the narcoleptic borderland (NBL)
disorders, including narcolepsy type 2, idiopathic hypersomnia, insufficient
sleep syndrome and hypersomnia associated with a psychiatric disorder, lack
well-defined markers and remain controversial in terms of aetiology, diagnosis
and management. The Swiss Primary Hypersomnolence and Narcolepsy Cohort Study
(SPHYNCS) is a comprehensive multicentre cohort study, which will investigate the
clinical picture, pathophysiology and long-term course of NT1 and the NBL. The
primary aim is to validate new and reappraise well-known markers for the
characterization of the NBL, facilitating the diagnostic process. Seven Swiss
sleep centres, belonging to the Swiss Narcolepsy Network (SNaNe), joined the
study and will prospectively enrol over 500 patients with recent onset of
excessive daytime sleepiness (EDS), hypersomnia or a suspected central disorder
of hypersomnolence (CDH) during a 3-year recruitment phase. Healthy controls and 
patients with EDS due to severe sleep-disordered breathing, improving after
therapy, will represent two control groups of over 50 patients each. Clinical and
electrophysiological (polysomnography, multiple sleep latency test, maintenance
of wakefulness test) information, and information on psychomotor vigilance and a 
sustained attention to response task, actigraphy and wearable devices (long-term 
monitoring), and responses to questionnaires will be collected at baseline and
after 6, 12, 24 and 36 months. Potential disease markers will be searched for in 
blood, cerebrospinal fluid and stool. Analyses will include quantitative
hypocretin measurements, proteomics/peptidomics, and immunological, genetic and
microbiota studies. SPHYNCS will increase our understanding of CDH and the
relationship between NT1 and the NBL. The identification of new disease markers
is expected to lead to better and earlier diagnosis, better prognosis and
personalized management of CDH.

© 2021 The Authors. Journal of Sleep Research published by John Wiley & Sons Ltd 
on behalf of European Sleep Research Society.

DOI: 10.1111/jsr.13296 
PMID: 33813771 

