
1. J Clin Oncol. 2021 Apr 9:JCO2003643. doi: 10.1200/JCO.20.03643. [Epub ahead of
print]

Impact of Previously Unrecognized HLA Mismatches Using Ultrahigh Resolution
Typing in Unrelated Donor Hematopoietic Cell Transplantation.

Mayor NP(1)(2), Wang T(3)(4), Lee SJ(5)(6), Kuxhausen M(5), Vierra-Green C(5),
Barker DJ(1), Auletta J(7), Bhatt VR(8), Gadalla SM(9), Gragert L(10), Inamoto
Y(11), Morris GP(12), Paczesny S(13), Reshef R(14), Ringdén O(15), Shaw BE(4),
Shaw P(16), Spellman SR(5), Marsh SGE(1)(2).

Author information: 
(1)Anthony Nolan Research Institute, Royal Free Hospital, London, UK.
(2)UCL Cancer Institute, University College London, London, UK.
(3)Division of Biostatistics, Medical College of Wisconsin, Milwaukee, WI.
(4)Center for International Blood and Marrow Transplant Research, Medical College
of Wisconsin, Milwaukee, WI.
(5)Center for International Blood and Marrow Transplant Research, National Marrow
Donor Program/Be The Match, Minneapolis, MN.
(6)Clinical Research Division, Fred Hutchinson Cancer Research Center, Seattle,
WA.
(7)Blood and Marrow Transplant Program and Host Defense Program, Nationwide
Children's Hospital, Columbus, OH.
(8)Division of Hematology-Oncology, University of Nebraska Medical Center, Omaha,
NE.
(9)Division of Cancer Epidemiology and Genetics, NIH-NCI Clinical Genetics
Branch, Rockville, MD.
(10)Tulane Cancer Center, Department of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine, Tulane
University School of Medicine, New Orleans, LA.
(11)Department of Hematopoietic Stem Cell Transplantation, National Cancer Center
Hospital, Tokyo, Japan.
(12)Department of Pathology, University of California San Diego, San Diego, CA.
(13)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, Medical University of South
Carolina, Charleston, SC.
(14)Division of Hematology/Oncology and Columbia Center for Translational
Immunology, Columbia University Irving Medical Center, New York, NY.
(15)Department of Clinical Sciences, Intervention and Technology, Translational
Cell Therapy Research Group, Karolinska Institute, Stockholm, Sweden.
(16)Department of Child and Adolescent Health, Cancer Centre for Children, The
Children's Hospital at Westmead, Westmead, New South Wales, Australia.

PURPOSE: Ultrahigh resolution (UHR) HLA matching is reported to result in better 
outcomes following unrelated donor hematopoietic cell transplantation, improving 
survival and reducing post-transplant complications. However, most studies
included relatively small numbers of patients. Here we report the findings from a
large, multicenter validation study.
METHODS: UHR HLA typing was available on 5,140 conventionally 10 out of 10
HLA-matched patients with malignant disease transplanted between 2008 and 2017.
RESULTS: After UHR HLA typing, 82% of pairs remained 10 out of 10 UHR-matched;
12.3% of patients were 12 out of 12 UHR HLA-matched. Compared with 12 out of 12
UHR-matched patients, probabilities of grade 2-4 acute graft-versus-host disease 
(aGVHD) were significantly increased with UHR mismatches (overall P = .0019) and 
in those patients who were HLA-DPB1 T-cell epitope permissively mismatched or
nonpermissively mismatched (overall P = .0011). In the T-cell-depleted subset,
the degree of UHR HLA mismatch was only associated with increased
transplant-related mortality (TRM) (overall P = .0068). In the T-cell-replete
subset, UHR HLA matching was associated with a lower probability of aGVHD
(overall P = .0020); 12 out of 12 UHR matching was associated with reduced TRM
risk when compared with HLA-DPB1 T-cell epitope permissively mismatched patients,
whereas nonpermissive mismatching resulted in a greater risk (overall P = .0003).
CONCLUSION: This study did not confirm that UHR 12 out of 12 HLA matching
increases the probability of overall survival but does demonstrate that aGVHD
risk, and in certain settings TRM, is lowest in UHR HLA-matched pairs and thus
warrants consideration when multiple 10 out of 10 HLA-matched donors of
equivalent age are available.

DOI: 10.1200/JCO.20.03643 
PMID: 33835855 

Conflict of interest statement: Stephanie J. LeeHonoraria: Wolters
KluwerConsulting or Advisory Role: Incyte, Pfizer, EMD Serono, Kadmon, MSD
Oncology, Sanofi, Genzyme, Regeneron, 4SCResearch Funding: Kadmon, Takeda, Amgen,
Bristol-Myers Squibb, EMD Serono, MSD, Novartis, Incyte, Syndax, Pfizer,
AstraZenecaPatents, Royalties, Other Intellectual Property: Patent pending for
high-affinity T-cell receptors that target the Merkel polyomavirus Jeffrey
AulettaConsulting or Advisory Role: MORE Health, AlloVir, AscellaHealth Vijaya R.
BhattConsulting or Advisory Role: Abbvie, Incyte, Agios, Genentech, Rigel,
Partnership for Health Analytic Research, LLC, Omeros, TakedaResearch Funding:
Incyte, Tolero Pharmaceuticals, National Marrow Donor Program, Abbvie, Pfizer,
Jazz PharmaceuticalsOther Relationship: Oncoceutics, Novartis, Pfizer Loren
GragertOther Relationship: National Marrow Donor Program/Be The Match, United
Network For Organ Sharing Yoshihiro InamotoHonoraria: Kyowa Kirin Co, Ltd,
Astellas Pharma, Sumitomo Dainippon, Novartis, Chugai Pharma, Bristol-Myers
Squibb, MSD K.K.Consulting or Advisory Role: Novartis, Janssen, Meiji Seika
Kaisha Gerald P. MorrisResearch Funding: Ferring Inc, AmgenTravel,
Accommodations, Expenses: Thermo Fisher Scientific Sophie PaczesnyPatents,
Royalties, Other Intellectual Property: Dr Paczesny has a patent on “Methods of
detection of graft-versus-host disease” licensed to Viracor-IBT Laboratories Ran 
ReshefConsulting or Advisory Role: Atara Biotherapeutics, Novartis, Bristol-Myers
Squibb, Gilead Sciences, TScan TherapeuticsResearch Funding: Atara
Biotherapeutics, Incyte, Pharmacyclics, Shire, Immatics, Takeda, Gilead Sciences,
Precision Biosciences, Astellas Pharma, Bristol-Myers Squibb Bronwen E.
ShawHonoraria: TherakosConsulting or Advisory Role: Orcabio Peter ShawConsulting 
or Advisory Role: NovartisOther Relationship: Link PharmaNo other potential
conflicts of interest were reported.

