
1. Behav Brain Res. 2021 Apr 9:113290. doi: 10.1016/j.bbr.2021.113290. [Epub ahead
of print]

Our reference: BBR 113290 Article reference: BBR_BBRES-D-20-01218 Article title: 
Apelin-13 activates the hippocampal BDNF/TrkB signaling pathway and suppresses
neuroinflammation in male rats with cisplatin-induced cognitive dysfunction To be
published in: Behavioural Brain Research.

Saral S(1), Topçu A(2), Alkanat M(3), Mercantepe T(4), Akyıldız K(5), Yıldız
L(6), Tümkaya L(7), Yazıcı ZA(8), Yılmaz A(9).

Author information: 
(1)Recep Tayyip Erdogan University, Faculty of Medicine, Department of
Physiology, Rize, Turkey. Electronic address: sinansaral61@msn.com.
(2)Recep Tayyip Erdogan University, Faculty of Medicine, Department of Medical
Pharmacology, Rize, Turkey. Electronic address: atilla.topcu@erdogan.edu.tr.
(3)Giresun University, Faculty of Medicine, Department of Physiology, Giresun,
Turkey. Electronic address: mehmet.alkanat@gmail.com.
(4)Recep Tayyip Erdogan University, Faculty of Medicine, Department of Histology 
and Embryology, Rize, Turkey. Electronic address:
tolga.mercantepe@erdogan.edu.tr.
(5)Recep Tayyip Erdogan University, School of Healh Care Services Vocational,
Department of Medical Services and Techniques, Rize, Turkey. Electronic address: 
Kerimali.akyildiz@erdogan.edu.tr.
(6)Recep Tayyip Erdogan University, Faculty of Medicine, Department of
Physiology, Rize, Turkey.
(7)Recep Tayyip Erdogan University, Faculty of Medicine, Department of Histology 
and Embryology, Rize, Turkey. Electronic address: levent.tumkaya@erdogan.edu.tr.
(8)Recep Tayyip Erdogan University, Faculty of Medicine, Department of
Microbiology, Rize, Turkey. Electronic address: zihni.yazici@erdogan.edu.tr.
(9)Recep Tayyip Erdogan University, Faculty of Medicine, Department of
Biochemistry, Rize, Turkey. Electronic address: adnan.yilmaz@erdogan.edu.tr.

It has been established that cisplatin causes neuronal damage and cognitive
impairment. However, the mechanism is not sufficiently clear. Apelin-13 is an
endogenous peptide with strong neuroprotective effects through the synthesis of
neurotrophic factors and suppression of inflammation. The aim of this study was
to investigate the role of brain-derived neurotrophic factor/tropomyosin receptor
kinase B (BDNF/TrkB) signaling pathway and the potential inhibitory effects of
apelin-13 in the mechanism of cisplatin-induced hippocampal damage and cognitive 
impairment. Apelin-13 was administered to adult sprague dawley male rats at a
dose of 20 nmol/kg every day for 4 weeks, cisplatin was administered at a dose of
5 mg/kg once a week for 4 weeks. The spatial and recognition memory tests of the 
rats were performed on the 5th week. BDNF and the inflammatory cytokines tumor
necrosis factor-α (TNF-α) and interleukin-1β (IL-1β) levels were measured by
ELISA in hippocampal homogenates. Pyramidal neuron and glial cell damage in the
hippocampal CA1, CA3 and dentate gyrus (DG) were analyzed histologically. TrkB
activity in the hippocampus was determined by immunohistochemical methods.
Cisplatin impaired spatial and recognition memory in rats, while apelin-13
improved spatial memory but did not affect recognition memory. Cisplatin
suppressed BDNF in the hippocampus while increased IL-1β and TNF-α. In contrast, 
apelin-13 administration increased BDNF but significantly suppressed TNF-α and
IL-1B. Cisplatin caused pyramidal neuron and glial cell damage in CA1, CA3 and
DG. In the cisplatin + apelin-13 group, however, pyramidal neuron and glial cell 
damage was less than those without apelin-13. Cisplatin increased TrkB activity
in the hippocampus, which was counteracted by apelin-13. In conclusion, apelin-13
reduced the cisplatin-induced cognitive deficiency, by suppressing inflammation
and stimulating the synthesis and activation of neurotrophic factors in
hippocampal tissue.

Copyright © 2021. Published by Elsevier B.V.

DOI: 10.1016/j.bbr.2021.113290 
PMID: 33845103 

