
1. Nanotechnology. 2021 Apr 12. doi: 10.1088/1361-6528/abf6ee. [Epub ahead of print]

In vitro anti-oxidant and cytotoxic activities of gold nanoparticles synthesized 
from an aqueous extract of the Xylopia aethiopica fruit.

Anadozie SO(1), Adewale OB(2), Meyer M(3), Davids H(4), Roux S(4).

Author information: 
(1)Microbiology, Biochemistry and Physiology, Nelson Mandela University, Port
Elizabeth, Eastern Cape, SOUTH AFRICA.
(2)Chemical Sciences, Afe Babalola University, Ado Ekiti, Ekiti, NIGERIA.
(3)Biotechnology, University of the Western Cape, Bellville, Western Cape, SOUTH 
AFRICA.
(4)Physiology, Nelson Mandela University, Port Elizabeth, Eastern Cape, SOUTH
AFRICA.

The development of gold nanoparticles (AuNPs) using green approach has drawn a
considerable interest in the field of nanomedicine. Its wide application in
clinical diagnosis, imaging and therapeutics portrays its importance for human
existence. In this study, we reported the biogenic synthesis of AuNPs using
aqueous extract of Xylopia aethiopica fruit (AEXAf), which act as both reducing
and stabilizing agent. The characterization of AEXAf-AuNPs was performed using
ultraviolet visible spectroscopy, dynamic light scattering and zeta potential
measurements, high-resolution transmission electron microscopy and Fourier
transform-infrared spectroscopy. In vitro anti-oxidant activities of the
AEXAf-AuNPs and AEXAf were evaluated using 2,2-diphenyl-1-picrylhydrazyl (DPPH)
and ferric reducing antioxidant power (FRAP). The in vitro cytotoxic activities
of AEXAf-AuNPs and AEXAf against breast and colorectal cancer cells were
evaluated using 3,-(4,5 dimethylthiazol)-2,5 diphenyl tetrazolium bromide (MTT)
viability and annexin-V/PI assays. The AEXAf-AuNPs exhibited surface plasmon
absorption maximum at 522 nm and were stabled for 4 weeks. The average size of
AEXAf-AuNPs was 10.61±3.33 nm on the high-resolution transmission electron
microscopy images. The in vitro anti-oxidant activities of AEXAf-AuNPs and AEXAf 
were concentration-dependent. The AEXAf-AuNPs was cytotoxic to the cancer cells
and non-toxic to the non-cancerous human fibroblast cells (KMST-6) (up to 200
µg/mL). From these results, AEXAf-AuNPs showed good anti-oxidant and anti-cancer 
activities, and can be suggested as possible therapeutic agent for breast and
colorectal cancers.

© 2021 IOP Publishing Ltd.

DOI: 10.1088/1361-6528/abf6ee 
PMID: 33845465 

