
1. J Periodontol. 1985 Oct;56(10):592-6.

Inhibitory effect of periodontally diseased root extracts on the growth of human 
gingival fibroblasts.

Olson RH, Adams DF, Layman DL.

Cementum shavings obtained from periodontally diseased and nondiseased areas of
100 removed, single-rooted teeth were extracted with either pyrogen-free water
(PFW) for 5 minutes, 1 M citric acid for 5 minutes or 45% phenol-PFW for 90
minutes at 65 degrees C. The extracts were membrane-filtered, dialyzed
exhaustively versus PFW, lyophilized, weighed and then dissolved in complete
growth medium. The phenol-water or citric acid extracts of cementum shavings from
periodontally diseased roots were positive for endotoxin by the limulus lysate
assay (LLA). Pyrogen-free water extracts of diseased or phenol-water extracts of 
nondiseased cementum shavings were negative, or only slightly positive,
respectively, for endotoxin by LLA. Media containing the various extracts were
added to logarithmically growing cultures of human gingival fibroblasts (HGF).
Separate cultures of HGF were exposed to Escherichia coli endotoxin at
concentrations of 50, 100, 250 and 500 micrograms/ml to determine the
growth-inhibitory effects of a known endotoxin. Cell growth was analyzed by
measuring the incorporation of tritiated thymidine into cells. Suppression of HGF
growth from 30 to 49% by E. coli endotoxin was concentration-dependent and linear
over the concentration range of endotoxin tested. Pyrogen-free water extracts of 
diseased (endotoxin negative) or phenol-water extracts of nondiseased cementum
shavings (slightly endotoxin positive) did not effect HGF growth. However, citric
acid or phenol-water extracts of diseased cementum shavings (highly endotoxin
positive) significantly suppressed HGF growth 58% and 61%, respectively. These
results indicate that citric acid is effective in removing cytotoxic substances, 
presumably endotoxin, from cementum shavings and suggest that citric acid
treatment is effective clinically in detoxifying periodontally diseased root
surfaces.

DOI: 10.1902/jop.1985.56.10.592 
PMID: 3903101  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

