
1. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 1977 Oct;74(10):4228-32.

Nonspecific DNA binding of genome-regulating proteins as a biological control
mechanism: measurement of DNA-bound Escherichia coli lac repressor in vivo.

Kao-Huang Y, Revzin A, Butler AP, O'Conner P, Noble DW, von Hippel PH.

Binding of genome regulatory proteins to nonspecific DNA sites may play an
important role in controlling the thermodynamics and kinetics of the interactions
of these proteins with their specific target DNA sequences. An estimate of the
fraction of Escherichia coli lac repressor molecules bound in vivo to the
operator region and to nonoperator sites on the E. coli chromosome is derived by 
measurement of the distribution of repressor between a minicell-producing E. coli
strain (P678-54) and the DNA-free minicells derived therefrom. Assuming the
minicell cytoplasm to be representative of that of the parent E. coli cells, we
find that less than 10% of the repressor tetramers of the average cell are free
in solution; the remainder are presumed to be bound to the bacterial chromosome. 
The minimum in vivo value of the association constant for repressor to bulk
nonoperator DNA (K(RD)) calculated from these results is about 10(3) M(-1), and
analysis of the sources of error in the minicell experiment suggests that the
actual in vivo value of K(RD) could be substantially greater. The value of K(RD),
coupled with in vitro data on the ionic strength dependence of this parameter,
can be used to estimate that the effective intracellular cation activity of E.
coli is no greater than about 0.24 M (and probably no less than 0.17 M) in terms 
of sodium ion equivalents. The minicell distribution experiments also confirm
that the association constant for the binding of inducer-repressor complex to
bulk nonoperator DNA (K(RID)) is [unk] K(RD)in vivo. These results are used to
calculate minimum in vivo values of K(RO) and K(RIO) (association constants for
repressor and for inducer-repressor complex binding to operator) of about 10(12) 
M(-1) and about 10(9) M(-1), respectively. The results fit a quantitative model
for operon regulation in which nonspecific DNA-repressor complexes play a key
role in determining basal and constitutive levels of gene expression [von Hippel,
P. H., Revzin, A., Gross, C. A. & Wang, A. C. (1974) Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA
71, 4808-4812].

DOI: 10.1073/pnas.74.10.4228 
PMCID: PMC431912
PMID: 412185  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

