
1. J Biochem. 1984 Jun;95(6):1593-602.

Structural studies of Fc receptors. V. Effect of phospholipase C treatment on the
binding activities of the Fc receptor of macrophage or its isolated plasma
membrane.

Aida Y, Itonaga M, Onoue K.

The effect of phospholipase C treatment on the binding activity of the Fc
receptor of guinea pig macrophage was studied to analyze the interaction of the
Fc receptor with membrane phospholipids necessary for the activity. It was
confirmed by subcellular fractionation that the receptor is localized on the
plasma membrane. Treatment of the whole cell or isolated plasma membrane with
phospholipase C of Clostridium perfringens diminished the binding of soluble
IgG2-immune complex to Fc receptors on the cell or membrane. On the other hand,
phospholipase C of Bacillus cereus did not affect the activity when it acted on
the whole cell but it did diminish the activity when it acted on the isolated
plasma membrane. Analysis of the phospholipids of untreated and treated
macrophages or plasma membrane showed that phosphatidylcholine molecules,
particularly those located in the membrane (not accessible to attack from the
cell surface by phospholipase C of B. cereus), appear to be crucial for efficient
interaction of macrophage Fc receptors with immune complex. Ligand-binding
experiments with macrophages showed that the diminished binding activity was due 
to a decrease of the avidity for immune complex, but did not seem to be due to a 
decrease in the number or affinity of Fc receptors for monomeric IgG2. Taken
together with the previous results which demonstrated that Fc receptors which had
apparently lost the activity due to delipidation could be reconstituted with
phosphatidylcholine but not with most other phospholipids, the results seem to
indicate that the diminution of the binding activity to the immune complex of
macrophage or its plasma membrane caused by phospholipase C treatment is due to
the impairment of multivalent interaction between Fc receptor molecules on the
membrane and IgG2 molecules in the immune complex, probably as a result of the
loss of interaction of the head groups of phospholipids with Fc receptor
molecules and the change in membrane properties resulting from the increase of
diglycerides.

DOI: 10.1093/oxfordjournals.jbchem.a134772 
PMID: 6088472  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

