
1. J Immunol. 1983 Jul;131(1):409-15.

The interaction of C3b bound to pneumococci with factor H (beta 1H globulin),
factor I (C3b/C4b inactivator), and properdin factor B of the human complement
system.

Brown EJ, Joiner KA, Gaither TA, Hammer CH, Frank MM.

Pneumococcal cell walls are potent activators of the alternative complement (C)
pathway; pneumococcal capsules are not. C3b that is deposited onto the cell walls
of encapsulated organisms, however, functions inefficiently in host defense
compared to C3b deposited onto capsular polysaccharides. Results of previous
studies with guinea pig erythrocytes suggested that C3b deposited onto surfaces
that do not activate the alternative pathway is rapidly inactivated. In the
present study, we examined the interactions of C3b bound to pneumococcal
capsules, to pneumococcal cell walls, and to the surface of sheep erythrocytes
(E) with the serum control proteins, Factor H (beta 1H globulin) (H) and Factor I
(C3b/4b inactivator) (I), and with Factor B (B) of the alternative C pathway.
Conversion of bound C3b to C3bi was assayed by binding of radiolabeled
conglutinin in a quantitative binding assay. Neither pneumococcal cell wall C3b
nor capsular C3b was converted efficiently to a conglutinin-binding form by serum
incubation. Experiments with purified C components showed that, after incubation 
with H and I, fewer conglutinin-binding sites were created on pneumococci than on
E bearing equal numbers of C3b. Molecular analysis demonstrated that this did not
result from cleavage of pneumococcal-bound C3b to an unusual,
nonconglutinin-binding form of the molecule. Binding studies in which
radiolabeled H was used demonstrated that the majority of C3b that is bound to
both pneumococcal capsules and cell walls bound H with a lower affinity than did 
E-bound C3b. Studies of the binding of radiolabeled B demonstrated that C3b that 
was bound to pneumococcal cell walls and to E demonstrated equal affinity for B. 
In contrast, the majority of C3b that was fixed to pneumococcal capsules bound B 
with only 1/30 as high affinity. We conclude that pneumococcal capsules are not
alternative pathway activators because the low affinity of capsular C3b for B
leads to inefficient formation of an alternative pathway convertase, C3bBb. With 
regard to H binding, both cell wall- and capsular-bound C3b act as if they were
in a "protected site" and resist degradation by the control proteins.


PMID: 6223077  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

