
1. Cancer Res. 1983 Oct;43(10):4530-6.

Effects of some sugar alcohol derivatives on mutation and induction of sister
chromatid exchanges.

Oláh E, Tóth K, Sugár J, Hegedüs L, Somfai-Relle S.

The mutagenicity of various alkylating sugar alcohol derivatives in the
Salmonella-microsome assay was studied, and the effects of these compounds on the
colony-forming ability and the frequency of sister chromatid exchange (SCE) in
Chinese hamster cells were determined. Cytostatic drugs under clinical trial
[Elobromol (DBD), Myelobromol (DBM), Lycurim (LY), Zitostop (ZI)], others in
preclinical analysis [dianhydrogalactitol (DAG), 3,4-diacetyldianhydrogalactitol 
(DiacDAG), 3,4-disuccinyldianhydrogalactitol (DisuDAG)], and compounds without
any known antitumor effect in transplantable tumors [1-bromo-3,6-anhydrodulcitol 
(BAD), 1,2-epoxi-3,6-anhydrodulcitol (EAD)] were examined. All the tested
compounds except DisuDAG were directly mutagenic in Salmonella strains TA 1535
and TA 100. The mutagenic effect of the chemicals was not influenced by S9 mix
from rat liver, with the exception of ZI and DiacDAG. DisuDAG appeared
nonmutagenic in strains TA 1535 and TA 100 exposed to microsomal enzymes from rat
liver, lung, and kidney and mouse and hamster liver, nor was DisuDAG mutagenic in
strains TA 1537, TA 1538, and TA 98 in either the presence or the absence of rat 
liver S9 mix. Mouse urine, after a single administration of DisuDAG to the
animal, proved to be mutagenic in strain TA 1535. This effect can be attributed
to the presence of DAG and EAD which could be identified by thin-layer
chromatography of urine, thus establishing the premutagenic character of DisuDAG.
All sugar alcohol derivatives increased the frequency of SCE. Doses required to
double the control SCE frequency were in the sublethal range of the survival
curve for DBD, DBM, LY, DAG, and DiacDAG. Doses higher than the sublethal ones
were required of ZI, DisuDAG, BAD, and EAD to achieve a 2-fold increase in SCE
frequency. On the basis of these doses, the relative potencies for SCE induction 
of the compounds were as follows: EAD less than BAD less than DisuDAG less than
ZI less than DiacDAG less than DAG less than DBD less than DBM less than LY.
Within this range, there was a 2 million-fold difference in the SCE production of
these chemically related compounds.


PMID: 6349793  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

