
1. Mol Immunol. 1995 Sep;32(13):957-64.

Activation of human complement by totally human monoclonal antibodies.

Dillman SL(1), Strelkauskas AJ, Su HR, Boackle RJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, Medical University of South
Carolina, Charleston 29425, USA.

A uniquely developed series of totally human monoclonal antibodies (mAbs) were
examined for their complement fixing properties in comparison to human myeloma
preparations and to commercially available human polyclonal immunoglobulins. C3b 
and C4b deposition was measured using a kinetic ELISA technique. When the IgG
myeloma proteins were tested for classical pathway activation, our findings were 
similar to those previously described, where IgG1 and IgG3 were more potent
activators of the classical pathway than IgG2 and IgG4. However, those same
studies determined that IgG2 was the best activator of the alternative pathway
followed by IgG1 and IgG3 while IgG4 does not activate complement via either
pathway. In our studies of alternative pathway activation, the IgG2 myeloma
exhibited strong activation of the alternative pathway, but, at levels lower than
the other three IgG subtypes. Using this test system, we examined the complement 
activating potential of four totally human mAbs that were constructed from the
peripheral blood lymphocytes of a colon carcinoma patient in long term remission.
We found that our uniquely constructed totally human IgG2 mAbs (A3, E1, F6 and
F8) were able to activate complement by both the classical and alternative
pathways to varying degrees. In addition, we found that the complement activating
ability of the human mAbs was greater than that of the human IgG2 myeloma
immunoglobulins or normal human IgG2 preparations. This study represents the
first report of complement activation by totally human mAbs and confirms more
recent findings which indicate that levels of complement activation by human IgG 
immunoglobulins cannot be predicted based solely on their subclass identity.

DOI: 10.1016/0161-5890(95)00064-l 
PMID: 7477001  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

