
1. Ann N Y Acad Sci. 1995 Sep 7;766:195-201.

Signal transduction by the B-cell antigen receptor.

DeFranco AL(1), Richards JD, Blum JH, Stevens TL, Law DA, Chan VW, Datta SK, Foy 
SP, Hourihane SL, Gold MR, et al.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, University of California, San
Francisco 94143-0552, USA.

The antigen receptor of B lymphocytes (BCR) plays important roles in recognition 
of foreign antigens and self-components to allow the immune system to make
appropriate antibody responses. The BCR is a complex between membrane
immunoglobulin and the Ig-alpha and Ig-beta heterodimer. Site-directed
mutagenesis experiments have shown that the mu heavy chain transmembrane domain
plays a key role in the association of mIgM with Ig-alpha/Ig-beta. In the absence
of complex formation, mIgM is retained in the endoplasmic reticulum, and this
function is also specified by the mu chain transmembrane domain. The ability of
various mutant mIgM molecules to associate with Ig-alpha/Ig-beta correlates well 
with their ability to induce signal transduction reactions such as protein
tyrosine phosphorylation and phosphoinositide breakdown. Thus, the signaling
ability of the BCR appears to reside in the Ig-alpha/Ig-beta heterodimer. The
cytoplasmic domains of Ig-alpha and Ig-beta each contain an ITAM sequence, which 
is defined by its limited homology with subunits of the T-cell antigen receptor
and of Fc receptors. Moreover, chimeric proteins containing these ITAMs and
surrounding sequences from the cytoplasmic domains of Ig-alpha or Ig-beta exhibit
signaling function characteristics of the intact BCR. The Ig-alpha and Ig-beta
chimeras are each capable of inducing all of the BCR signaling events tested and 
thus represent redundant functions. Cross-linking these chimeras leads to their
phosphorylation and to binding of the intracellular tyrosine kinases Lyn and Syk.
The BCR expressed in the nonlymphoid AtT20 cells, which express the Src-family
tyrosine kinase Fyn but not Syk, was not able to trigger vigorous signaling
reactions. Introduction of the active form of Syk into these cells restored some 
signaling events. These results are consistent with a model in which the ITAMs
act to initiate the BCR signaling reactions by binding and activating tyrosine
kinases.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1749-6632.1995.tb26662.x 
PMID: 7486656  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

