
1. J Am Acad Dermatol. 1995 Dec;33(6):1019-29.

Dog, cat, and human bites: a review.

Griego RD(1), Rosen T, Orengo IF, Wolf JE.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Dermatology, Baylor College of Medicine, Houston, TX 77030, USA.

It is estimated that half of all Americans will be bitten by an animal or another
human being during their lifetimes. The vast majority of the estimated 2 million 
annual mammalian bite wounds are minor, and the victims never seek medical
attention. Nonetheless, bite wounds account for approximately 1% of all emergency
department visits and more than $30 million in annual health care costs.
Infection is the most common bite-associated complication; the relative risk is
determined by the species of the inflicting animal, bite location, host factors, 
and local wound care. Most infections caused by mammalian bites are
polymicrobial, with mixed aerobic and anaerobic species. The clinical
presentation and appropriate treatment of infected bite wounds vary according to 
the causative organisms. Human bite wounds have long had a bad reputation for
severe infection and frequent complication. However, recent data demonstrate that
human bites occurring anywhere other than the hand present no more of a risk for 
infection than any other type of mammalian bite. The increased incidence of
serious infections and complications associated with human bites to the hand
warrants their consideration and management in three different categories:
occlusional/simple, clenched fist injuries, and occlusional bites to the hand.
This article reviews dogs, cat, and human bite wounds, risk factors for
complications, evaluation components, bacteriology, antimicrobial susceptibility 
patterns, and recommended treatments. Epidemiology, clinical presentation, and
treatment of infections caused by Pasteurella multocida, Capnocytophaga
canimorsus, Eikenella corrodens, and rhabdovirus (rabies only) receive particular
emphasis.

DOI: 10.1016/0190-9622(95)90296-1 
PMID: 7490347  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

