
1. J Leukoc Biol. 1995 Dec;58(6):675-82.

An analogue of lipid A and LPS from Rhodobacter sphaeroides inhibits neutrophil
responses to LPS by blocking receptor recognition of LPS and by depleting
LPS-binding protein in plasma.

Aida Y(1), Kusumoto K, Nakatomi K, Takada H, Pabst MJ, Maeda K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Periodontology and Endodontology, Faculty of Dentistry, Kyushu
University, Fukuoka, Japan.

When incubated with lipopolysaccharide (LPS) in the presence of plasma,
neutrophils become primed for enhanced release of superoxide in response to
triggering by formyl-Met-Leu-Phe (fMLP). The effect of LPS on phagocytes is
inhibited by a synthetic lipid A precursor, LA-14-PP (lipid IVa) or by LPS from
Rhodobacter sphaeroides (Rs). We studied the mechanisms by which LA-14-PP or
Rs-LPS inhibited LPS-induced responses. When neutrophils were exposed to LA-14-PP
or Rs-LPS for 3 min and then to Escherichia coli-LPS, the antagonists inhibited
priming for superoxide release, and also blocked up-regulation of CD11b and
adherence. This inhibition was dependent on plasma, was not overcome by higher
amounts of E. coli-LPS or plasma, and was not observed at 0 degrees C, suggesting
that E. coli-LPS was not able to interact with its receptor or other cellular
recognition molecule in neutrophils that had been exposed to the antagonists. The
alternative possibility that LA-14-PP or Rs-LPS depleted a plasma cofactor,
resulting in inhibition of priming, was investigated by using LPS from
Porphyromonas gingivalis (Pg) and Bordetella pertussis (Bp). These LPS primed
neutrophils in a plasma-dependent and CD14-dependent manner, but were not blocked
by LA-14-PP or Rs-LPS. When sub-optimal concentrations of plasma were exposed to 
LA-14-PP or Rs-LPS, and then mixed with Pg-LPS or Bp-LPS, followed by incubation 
with neutrophils, priming and up-regulation of CD11b were inhibited, and this
inhibition was overcome by increasing the concentration of plasma. Binding of
LPS-binding protein (LBP) in plasma to immobilized E. coli-LPS was inhibited by
pre-incubation of plasma with LA-14-PP or Rs-LPS. Together with the result that
treatment of plasma with anti-LBP antibody abolished the cofactor activity of
plasma, these results indicated that LA-14-PP and Rs-LPS depleted LBP from
plasma, resulting in inability of LPS to act on neutrophils. Thus LA-14-PP and
Rs-LPS inhibited the action of LPS on neutrophils by at least two mechanisms,
blocking of LPS receptor recognition and depletion of the cofactor LBP.

DOI: 10.1002/jlb.58.6.675 
PMID: 7499965  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

