
1. J Immunol. 1994 Jul 1;153(1):117-27.

Human T cell-dependent B cell differentiation induced by staphylococcal
superantigens.

Stohl W(1), Elliott JE, Linsley PS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, University of Southern California School of Medicine, 
Los Angeles 90033.

Microbial superantigens (SAgs), by virtue of their binding to TCR V beta elements
on T cells and to class II MHC molecules on accessory cells (AC), trigger T cell 
activation. Although anti-CD3 mAb (which also trigger T cell activation via
surface CD3/TCR) can readily induce T cell-dependent B cell differentiation in
unmanipulated PBMC cultures, induction of Ig production in SAg-stimulated
cultures has usually required special manipulation of the T cells, such as
irradiating them or treating them with mitomycin C. We now demonstrate that eight
different staphylococcal SAgs, typically at concentrations 10- to 100-fold lower 
than those required for proliferation, can each trigger unmanipulated peripheral 
blood and tonsil T cells to drive polyclonal B cell differentiation. Such
SAg-induced T cell-dependent generation of Ig-secreting cells (IgSC) requires T
cells and B cells only and occurs in the absence of monocytes as long as there
are adequate numbers of B cells to serve as (DR+) AC. Physical contact among T
cells, responder B cells, and AC (when different from the responder B cells) is
required. The fusion protein CTLA4Ig inhibits SAg-induced IgSC generation in a
dose-dependent fashion, whereas a control fusion protein has no such effect. In
contrast, CTLA4Ig has, at best, only modest effects on SAg-induced T cell
proliferation, indicating that CD28 (CTLA4)/B7 (B7-like) interactions play a more
prominent role in SAg-induced IgSC generation than in SAg-induced T cell
proliferation. These results establish SAg-induced T cell-dependent B cell
differentiation as a useful model for T cell/B cell interactions, inasmuch as no 
other cell types are necessary for successful B cell differentiation; these
results also demonstrate the importance of CD28 (CTLA4)/B7 (B7-like)-dependent
mechanisms in this process.


PMID: 7515921  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

