
1. Cell Immunol. 1994 Jun;156(1):220-9.

Costimulation of superantigen-activated T lymphocytes by autologous dendritic
cells is dependent on B7.

Nestle FO(1), Thompson C, Shimizu Y, Turka LA, Nickoloff BJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, University of Michigan, Ann Arbor 48109-0602.

Highly purified populations of dendritic cells (DCs) can be isolated from various
tissues such as skin and blood. These sites are likely to encounter secreted
toxins of bacteria such as superantigens. In vivo, DCs express the cell surface
molecule B7, a counterreceptor for CD28 which provides costimulation to resting T
cells. Highly purified preparations of DCs obtained from the epidermis and dermis
of normal skin as well as blood were used to study the role of B7 in superantigen
presentation to autologous T cells, as well as in alloantigen responses. We
compared these results to those obtained with nondendritic antigen presenting
cells (APCs) such as mononuclear cells derived from the Ficoll-Hypaque interface 
(PBMCs). All DC populations strongly express B7, and in a purely autologous
system staphylococcal enterotoxin B (SEB)-mediated T cell proliferation was
inhibited by 55-85% using a soluble chimeric fusion protein (i.e., CTLA4Ig), a
potent inhibitor of CD28:B7 interaction. In contrast, while T cells also
proliferated vigorously when stimulated by SEB in the presence of autologous PBMC
(which only weakly express B7), costimulation was not inhibited by CTLA4Ig. In
allogeneic responses, DCs were also more potent stimulators compared to PBMC, but
both types of APC:T cell reactions were almost completely inhibited by CTLA4Ig (>
90%). For both SEB-mediated reactions and alloantigen reactions, the relative
importance of LFA-1 and HLA-DR was similar between DCs and PBMCs. The data
indicate that these DCs express B7, which can function in the SEB-driven response
of autologous T cells, as well as in allogeneic T cell reactions. Overall, when
comparing the relative costimulatory capabilities of different types of APCs, it 
appears the relatively low level of B7 expressed by PBMC functioned effectively
in allogeneic reactions, whereas only the higher levels of B7 expressed by these 
DC populations functioned in SEB-mediated T cell responses.

DOI: 10.1006/cimm.1994.1166 
PMID: 7515331  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

