
1. Eur J Immunol. 1994 Jul;24(7):1536-43.

Fine antigen specificity of human gamma delta T cell lines (V gamma 9+)
established by repetitive stimulation with a serotype (KTH-1) of a gram-positive 
bacterium, Streptococcus sanguis.

Mochizuki M(1), Suzuki N, Takeno M, Nagafuchi H, Harada T, Kaneoka H, Yamashita
N, Hirayama K, Nakajima T, Mizushima Y, et al.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Allergy and Rheumatic Diseases, St. Marianna University School of 
Medicine, Kanagawa, Japan.

We have established human gamma delta T cell lines specific for Streptococcus
sanguis (S. sanguis) KTH-1 present in normal oral cavity flora. The CD4-CD8-CD3+V
gamma 9+V delta 1-CD45RO+ CD25+ T cell lines showed a proliferative response to
the streptococcal antigen (Ag) in the presence of autologous antigen-presenting
cells without apparent evidence of HLA restriction. The proliferative response of
the gamma delta T cell lines was completely blocked by anti-TcR gamma delta
monoclonal antibody (mAb) and anti-HLA class I mAb (W6/32), whereas anti-HLA
classical class Ia mAb (B-H9; anti-HLA-A,B,C), anti-HLA class II mAb (anti-DR,
anti-DQ, and anti-DP) and anti-CD4 mAb did not have any inhibitory effects.
Surprisingly, the gamma delta T cell lines showed the proliferative response
against the original bacterial Ag KTH-1 exclusively, and exhibited no
cross-reactivity with nominal Ag such as purified protein derivative of
tuberculin, tetanus toxoid and Mycobacterium tuberculosis, or the same species
but different strain of S. sanguis, American Type Culture Collection (ATCC)
standard strain (10556), or even with the same strain but different serotype of
S. sanguis, KTH-3. Moreover, cytokine production of the gamma delta T cell lines 
was similar to the Th1 pattern [interferon-gamma, tumor necrosis factor
(TNF)-alpha and TNF-beta]. They also produced interleukin-8 that functions as one
of chemoattractants for polymorphonuclear cells. Using direct sequencing
technique of the polymerase chain reaction products, we found that junctional
diversity of the T cell receptor (TcR) used by the parental KTH-1 specific gamma 
delta T cell line and its subclones is rather limited. It is suggested that gamma
delta T cells with canonical TcR could preferentially respond to KTH-1 Ag. Thus, 
in addition to a broad or cross-reactivity of gamma delta T cells against
phylogenetically conserved stress/heat-shock protein, which is well characterized
by others, some peripheral blood gamma delta T cells could recognize and kill
exogenous agents with fine antigenic specificity to protect the body against
them.

DOI: 10.1002/eji.1830240712 
PMID: 7517873  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

