
1. J Biol Chem. 1994 Jul 8;269(27):18001-6.

Cellular catabolism of normal very low density lipoproteins via the low density
lipoprotein receptor-related protein/alpha 2-macroglobulin receptor is induced by
the C-terminal domain of lipoprotein lipase.

Chappell DA(1), Inoue I, Fry GL, Pladet MW, Bowen SL, Iverius PH, Lalouel JM,
Strickland DK.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Internal Medicine, University of Iowa College of Medicine, Iowa 
City 52242.

Lipoprotein lipase (LPL) binds to the low density lipoprotein receptor-related
protein (LRP)/alpha 2-macroglobulin receptor and induces catabolism of normal
human very low density lipoproteins (VLDL) via LRP in vitro. Recent studies
showed that the C-terminal domain of LPL can bind LRP in solid phase assays and
inhibit cellular catabolism of two LRP ligands, activated alpha 2-macroglobulin
and the 39-kDa receptor-associated protein (Williams, S.E., Inoue, I., Tran, H., 
Fry, G. L., Pladet, M.W., Iverius, P.-H., Lalouel, J.-M., Chappell, D.A., and
Strickland, D.K. (1994) J. Biol. Chem. 269, 8653-8658). The current study
investigated the potential for this region of LPL to promote cellular catabolism 
of VLDL via LRP. A fragment comprising the C-terminal domain of LPL (designated
LPLC) was expressed in bacteria and found to promote cellular binding, uptake,
and degradation of normal human VLDL in a dose-dependent manner. These effects
were present whether LPLC was added simultaneously with 125I-VLDL or was prebound
to cell surfaces prior to the assay. Mutations involving Lys407, Trp393, Trp394, 
or deletion of the C-terminal 14 residues reduced the effects of LPLC. Three
LRP-binding proteins, the receptor-associated protein, lactoferrin, and a
polyclonal antibody against LRP, competed for 125I-VLDL degradation induced by
LPLC. Heparin or heparinase treatment of cells prevented LPLC-induced 125I-VLDL
catabolism. Thus, cell-surface proteoglycans play an important role in this
pathway. Interestingly, either LPLC or LPL when added in excess could block
LPL-induced 125I-VLDL degradation presumably by interacting directly with LRP.
However, unlabeled VLDL could not prevent catabolism of 125I-labeled LPLC or LPL.
These data show that cellular fates for VLDL versus LPLC or LPL are divergent.
This is probably due to independent catabolism of the latter via cell-surface
proteoglycans. In summary, these in vitro studies indicate that a fragment of LPL
corresponding to the C-terminal domain mimics the native enzyme with respect to
induction of VLDL catabolism via LRP. Because LPLC lacks the catalytic site of
native LPL, these studies establish that lipase activity is not required for
LRP-mediated lipoprotein catabolism.


PMID: 7517936  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

