
1. Ultrastruct Pathol. 1994 May-Jun;18(3):349-55.

Angiogenic process in bacillary angiomatosis.

Kostianovsky M(1), Greco MA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology and Cell Biology, Thomas Jefferson University,
Philadelphia, Pennsylvania.

Eight cases of cutaneous bacillary angiomatosis related to acquired
immunodeficiency syndrome were studied by light and electron microscopy and by
immunohistochemistry with a panel of antibodies specific for endothelial and
histiocytic markers. Light microscopy showed an inflammatory reaction with florid
neovascularization and clusters of Warthin-Starry-positive bacilli. In addition, 
solid areas of spindle cells were also present that in some cases mimicked
Kaposi's sarcoma or other sarcomas. The investigation focused primarily on the
spindle cell areas and the angiogenic process present in bacillary angiomatosis. 
By immunohistochemistry the lesions, including the spindle cell areas, expressed 
all endothelial markers used; CD34, factor VIII-related antigen, and Ulex
europaeus 1 were the most consistent in intensity, however. In those areas the
other endothelial markers, BNH9 and Psophocarpus tetragonolobus, were weak and
not always uniform. The macrophage/monocyte markers used were alpha
1-antitrypsin, lysosome, kp1 (CD68), and polyclonal factor XIIIa; these revealed 
a sprinkle of positive cells ranging from 10% to 20% of the cell population. By
electron microscopy primitive capillaries were present lined by plump endothelial
cells containing frequent abluminal microprocesses forming intercellular lumina. 
Mitoses and intracytoplasmic lumen formation were infrequent. The study
illustrates that bacillary angiomatosis is composed of active endothelial
neoformation with the spindle cells representing immature endothelial cells.
Furthermore, the features of this angiogenic process recapitulate the morphologic
events described in experimental models.

DOI: 10.3109/01913129409023203 
PMID: 7520641  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

