
1. Infect Immun. 1994 Dec;62(12):5205-12.

Effects of cytokines and periodontopathic bacteria on the leukocyte
function-associated antigen 1/intercellular adhesion molecule 1 pathway in
gingival fibroblasts in adult periodontitis.

Hayashi J(1), Saito I, Ishikawa I, Miyasaka N.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Periodontology, Faculty of Dentistry, Tokyo Medical and Dental
University, Japan.

We investigated the effects of inflammatory cytokines and periodontopathic
bacteria on expression of intercellular adhesion molecule 1 (ICAM-1), vascular
cell adhesion molecule 1, and E-selectin (endothelial leukocyte adhesion molecule
1) in cultured human gingival fibroblasts (HGF). Cell surface ICAM-1 was
upregulated on HGF under transcriptional control by exposure not only to
interleukin-1 beta, tumor necrosis factor alpha, and gamma interferon but also to
sonic extracts prepared from Porphyromonas gingivalis and Prevotella intermedia
(nigrescens) and lipopolysaccharides from Escherichia coli. However, these
stimuli induced only minimal expression of vascular cell adhesion molecule 1 and 
E-selectin on HGF. Binding assays using HGF and Molt 4, the human T-cell leukemia
cell line, showed induced ICAM-1 to be functional, and the increased binding was 
blocked by a combination of monoclonal antibodies against ICAM-1 and leukocyte
function-associated antigen 1. Furthermore, gingival tissues from adult
periodontitis patients showed increased mRNA expression of ICAM-1 compared with
that in tissues from normal healthy donors. In immunohistological analysis, we
also observed in vivo that the expression of ICAM-1 on fibroblasts in adult
periodontitis tissues was greater than that in normal gingiva. Thus, the
overexpression of ICAM-1 on gingival fibroblasts induced by cytokines and
periodontopathic bacteria is speculated to be deeply involved in the accumulation
and retention of leukocyte function-associated antigen 1-bearing leukocytes in
adult periodontitis lesions.

DOI: 10.1128/IAI.62.12.5205-5212.1994 
PMCID: PMC303255
PMID: 7525481  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

