
1. Eur J Immunol. 1995 Feb;25(2):322-7.

Human circulating specific antibody-forming cells after systemic and mucosal
immunizations: differential homing commitments and cell surface differentiation
markers.

Quiding-Järbrink M(1), Lakew M, Nordström I, Banchereau J, Butcher E, Holmgren J,
Czerkinsky C.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical, Microbiology and Immunology, University of Göteborg,
Sweden.

Circulating spontaneous antibody-secreting cells (ASC) induced by mucosal and
systemic immunizations in human volunteers have been characterized with respect
to differentiation stage and homing commitments. Irrespective of the immunization
route, the large majority of ASC co-expressed CD19 and HLA-DR, which are normally
lost during the transition of plasmablasts to plasmocytes, as well as CD38, a
marker of activated B cell blasts, expressed also by plasmocytes. However, these 
cells expressed neither CD28, a molecule acquired by plasmocytes, nor CD22 and
CD37, which are lost during the transition of plasmablasts to plasmocytes.
Therefore, the large majority of ASC found in peripheral blood after oral and
parenteral immunizations are terminally differentiated B cells, but not fully
differentiated plasmocytes. As a whole, the mucosally derived ASC population
seemed to be more homogenously differentiated. CD25 was detected on few ASC,
whereas ASC expressing CD71 were more numerous, especially among systemically
derived ASC. Almost all ASC expressed the adhesion molecules CD44 and alpha
4-integrins, irrespective of immunization route. However, virtually all
systemically derived ASC expressed L-selectin, recognizing the peripheral lymph
node addressin, whereas only a minority of mucosally induced blood ASC expressed 
L-selectin. These studies are the first to demonstrate in humans that circulating
precursors of mucosal B cell immunoblasts utilize organ-specific recognition
mechanisms distinct from those of corresponding systemic B cells and appear to be
more advanced in the B lineage maturation pathway. Specialization of receptor
expression could explain both the unification of immune responses in diverse
mucosal sites and the physiologic segregation of mucosal from non-mucosal immune 
mechanisms in humans.

DOI: 10.1002/eji.1830250203 
PMID: 7533081  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

