
1. Clin Immunol Immunopathol. 1995 Apr;75(1):20-5.

Decreased levels of complement receptor 1 (CD35) on B lymphocytes in persons with
HIV infection.

Munson LG(1), Scott ME, Landay AL, Spear GT.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Immunology/Microbiology, Rush Medical School, Chicago, Illinois 
60612.

Previous studies have shown that complement receptor 1 (CR1) expression on
erythrocytes is decreased under several conditions including HIV infection and
autoimmune diseases. The goal of this study was to determine whether expression
of CR1 on peripheral blood B cells, where this receptor plays a role during
immune responses, is altered in persons with HIV infection. The B cells from
rheumatoid arthritis (RA) patients were also assessed since this represents a
group with known complement and B cell abnormalities. The CD19+ B cells from
persons with either HIV infection or RA had significantly reduced levels of CR1
when compared with control donors (75 and 72% CR1+ versus 94% CR1+ for control
donors). The reduction of B cell CR1 occurred in both the percentage of B cells
positive for CR1 and the levels of CR1 found on positive cells. In contrast, CR1 
on monocytes was not reduced. As shown in previous studies, CR2 was also found to
be reduced on B cells from the HIV-infected persons and there was extensive
overlap between the B cell subsets which lacked expression of CR1 and CR2. The
complement receptor-negative B cells found in HIV-infected persons were not
immature or activated as defined by their lack of expression of CD10 or B7,
respectively. Elevated levels of C4d, a classical complement pathway-activation
product, were detected in plasma from both HIV-infected and RA patients. These
studies suggest that chronic complement activation occurring in persons with HIV 
infection or RA can affect the complement receptor phenotype of peripheral blood 
B cells. Since complement receptors are involved in activation of B cells, the
subset that lacks CR1 may represent cells that have encountered immune complexes 
and may therefore be stimulated. Additionally, the downregulation of complement
receptors may have significant effects on the ability of B cells to capture and
present opsonized antigens.

DOI: 10.1006/clin.1995.1047 
PMID: 7533682  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

