
1. Infect Immun. 1995 Sep;63(9):3367-72.

Replacement of the DR alpha chain with the E alpha chain enhances presentation of
Mycoplasma arthritidis superantigen by the human class II DR molecule.

Sawada T(1), Pergolizzi R, Ito K, Silver J, Atkin C, Cole BC, Chang MD.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, North Shore University Hospital, Manhasset, New York
11030, USA.

Mycoplasma arthritidis mitogen (MAM) is produced by an organism which can cause
chronic proliferative arthritis in rodents. MAM possesses a typical
superantigenic activity; it has the ability to activate a large panel of T cells 
which express specific V beta segments of the T-cell receptor. The presentation
of MAM to T cells by antigen-presenting cells is mediated primarily through its
binding to the major histocompatibility complex (MHC) class II E alpha chain in
mice and the DR alpha chain in humans. However, MAM is much less active for human
peripheral blood lymphocytes than for mouse splenocytes. It was suggested that a 
difference in MAM binding affinity between human and mouse class II molecules may
account for their different MAM activities. To examine this possibility, we
generated a panel of B-cell transfectants whose DR molecule is composed of either
the DR alpha or the E alpha chain paired with a DR3 beta chain. The ability of
these transfectants to present MAM to human peripheral T cells was analyzed. Our 
data show that transfectants expressing E alpha DR beta chimeric molecules have
higher MAM-presenting activity than transfectants expressing wild-type DR alpha
DR beta molecules, while the latter have higher activity in stimulating
DR3-alloreactive T cells. Since both types of transfectants present MAM to T
cells expressing the same T-cell receptor V beta gene families, the higher
MAM-presenting activity of the E alpha transfectant is not due to its ability to 
interact with a different set of T cells. Furthermore, both the E alpha 1 and E
alpha 2 domains contribute to this increased affinity for MAM binding. Taken
together, our data suggest that there may be multiple MAM binding sites on the E 
alpha and DR alpha chains and residues unique to the E alpha chain may provide
additional affinity for MAM.

DOI: 10.1128/IAI.63.9.3367-3372.1995 
PMCID: PMC173463
PMID: 7642264  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

