
1. Blood. 1995 Oct 1;86(7):2642-52.

Role of free protein S and C4b binding protein in regulating the coagulant
response to Escherichia coli.

Taylor FB Jr(1), Dahlback B, Chang AC, Lockhart MS, Hatanaka K, Peer G, Esmon CT.

Author information: 
(1)Oklahoma Medical Research Foundation, Program of Cardiovascular Biology,
Oklahoma City 73104, USA.

Previous studies showed that infusion of C4b-binding protein with sublethal
Escherichia coli (E. coli) in the primate produced a consumptive coagulopathy
followed by microvascular thrombosis and renal failure. The first objective of
this study was to characterize the pathophysiology and mechanism of this
phenomena following infusion of both these agents with emphasis on defining the
role of free protein S. The second objective was to examine the relevance of this
model to the hemolytic uremic syndrome. Infusion of C4b-binding protein alone
reduced free protein S and decreased platelet concentration to 20% of baseline,
whereas infusion of the C4b-binding protein/protein S complex did not. There was 
no activation of other inflammatory or coagulant factors. Infusion of sublethal E
coli alone produced a transient inflammatory response with no reduction of free
protein S. However, coinfusion of C4b-binding protein with sublethal E coli
reduced free protein S and produced a thrombocytopenia, anemia, and a
microvascular thrombotic response, whereas infusion of the C4b-binding
protein/protein S complex with sublethal E coli did not. Studies comparing the
effects of neutralizing (S-163) and nonneutralizing (S-145) antibodies with
protein S coinfused with sublethal E coli produced similar contrasting results.
Therefore, we concluded that neutralization of free protein S, and not some other
property of C4b-binding protein influenced by protein S, accounted for this
microvascular thrombotic response. This response is similar to the hemolytic
uremic syndrome characterized by thrombocytopenia, anemia, shistocytosis, and
renal glomerular thrombosis with uremia. Comparison of the respective renal
histopathologic appearance supports this conclusion. This raises the possibility 
that inhibition of protein S activity (possibly by one of the forms of
C4b-binding proteins) might be one of the factors contributing to microvascular
thrombotic disorder, such as the hemolytic uremic syndrome.


PMID: 7670107  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

