
1. J Immunol. 1993 Feb 1;150(3):726-35.

Proliferation of human T lymphocytes induced with superantigens is not dependent 
on costimulation by the CD28 counter-receptor B7.

Damle NK(1), Klussman K, Leytze G, Linsley PS.

Author information: 
(1)Bristol-Myers Squibb Pharmaceutical Research Institute, Seattle, WA 98121.

Staphylococcal enterotoxins, also known as superantigens (SAg), bind class II MHC
molecules on APC and upon direct cell-to-cell contact stimulate proliferation of 
T cells expressing appropriate V beta gene products. The T cell surface molecule 
CD28 binds its costimulatory counter-receptor, B7 expressed on APC, and augments 
IL-2 production and T cell growth. Although the role of B7 costimulation during
Ag-specific responses of T cells is established, its involvement during the
activation of T cells with SAg has not been examined. Using a soluble Ig C gamma 
1 chimera of CTLA-4, a second receptor for B7 and a homologue of CD28, this study
examines the role of B7 expressed on APC during the induction of proliferation of
CD4+ T cells upon stimulation with SAg (SAg/staphylococcal enterotoxins).
CTLA-4lg, which has a higher avidity for B7 than CD28, had no effect on the
synthesis of IL-2 as well as proliferative responses of CD4+ T cells induced by
SAg presented on allogeneic EBV-transformed B cells, and IFN-gamma-activated
endothelial cells. In contrast, T cell proliferation induced by alloAg
presentation by the same APC was significantly inhibited by CTLA-4lg. mAb
directed at the CD11a/CD18 molecule inhibited both SAg-induced and alloAg-induced
proliferation of T cells. AlloAg-primed CD4+ T cells, which expressed both class 
II MHC and intercellular adhesion molecule-1 but not B7, presented SAg to and
induced proliferation of both resting and SAg-primed T cells. These responses
were inhibited by mAb directed at CD11a/CD18 but not by CTLA-4 Rg. These results 
suggest that SAg-induced responses differ from those induced by alloAg in that
they are not obligatorily dependent on the costimulation by B7. In contrast,
adhesive interaction between CD11a/CD18 on T cells and its counter-receptor on
SAg-presenting cells is necessary and probably sufficient to support SAg-induced 
proliferation of T cells.


PMID: 7678619  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

