
1. J Cell Biol. 1993 Jul;122(2):497-511.

Peptides derived from two separate domains of the matrix protein thrombospondin-1
have anti-angiogenic activity.

Tolsma SS(1), Volpert OV, Good DJ, Frazier WA, Polverini PJ, Bouck N.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology-Immunology, Northwestern University Medical School,
Chicago, Illinois 60611.

Thrombospondin-1 (TSP1) is a large modular matrix protein containing three
identical disulfide-linked 180-kD chains that inhibits neovascularization in vivo
(Good et al., 1990). To determine which of the structural motifs present in the
180-kD TSP1 polypeptide mediate the anti-angiogenic activity, a series of
protease-generated fragments were tested using several in vitro and in vivo
assays that reflect angiogenic activity. The majority of the anti-angiogenic
activity of TSP1 resides in the central 70-kD stalk region which alone could
block neovascularization induced by bFGF in the rat cornea in vivo and inhibit
both migration in a modified Boyden chamber and [3H]thymidine incorporation
stimulated by bFGF in cultured capillary endothelial cells. Although TSP1 has
been shown to bind active TGF beta 1, this cytokine could not account for the
inhibitory effects of the stalk region of TSP1 on cultured endothelial cells.
Peptides and truncated molecules were used to further localize inhibitory
activity to two domains of the central stalk, the procollagen homology region and
the properdin-like type 1 repeats. Trimeric recombinant TSP1 containing
NH2-terminal sequences truncated after the procollagen-like module inhibited
endothelial cell migration in vitro and corneal neovascularization in vivo
whereas trimeric molecules truncated before this domain were inactive as was the 
NH2-terminal heparin-binding domain that is present in both recombinant
molecules. A series of peptides from the procollagen-like region, the smallest of
which consisted of residues 303-309 of TSP1, inhibited angiogenesis in vivo in
the rat cornea and the migration of endothelial cells in vitro. A 19-residue
peptide containing these sequences blocked vessel formation in the granulation
tissue invading a polyvinyl sponge implanted into the mouse. Nineteen residue
peptides derived from two of the three type 1 repeats present in the intact TSP1 
molecule blocked neovascularization in vivo in the rat cornea and inhibited the
migration of cultured endothelial cells with ED50's of 0.6-7 microM. One of these
peptides, containing residues 481-499 of TSP1, also inhibited vessel formation in
granulation tissue invading sponges in vivo. These results suggest that the large
TSP1 molecule employs at least two different structural domains and perhaps two
different mechanisms to accomplish a single physiological function, the
inhibition of neovascularization. The definition of short peptides from each of
these domains that are able to block the angiogenic process may be of use in
designing targeted inhibitors of the pathological neovascularization that
underlies many diseases.

DOI: 10.1083/jcb.122.2.497 
PMCID: PMC2119646
PMID: 7686555  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

