
1. Mol Cell Biol. 1993 Sep;13(9):5771-80.

Constitutive tyrosine phosphorylation of the T-cell receptor (TCR) zeta subunit: 
regulation of TCR-associated protein tyrosine kinase activity by TCR zeta.

van Oers NS(1), Tao W, Watts JD, Johnson P, Aebersold R, Teh HS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, University of British Columbia,
Vancouver, Canada.

The T-cell receptor (TCR) zeta subunit is an important component of the TCR
complex, involved in signal transduction events following TCR engagement. In this
study, we showed that the TCR zeta chain is constitutively tyrosine
phosphorylated to similar extents in thymocytes and lymph node T cells.
Approximately 35% of the tyrosine-phosphorylated TCR zeta (phospho zeta)
precipitated from total cell lysates appeared to be surface associated.
Furthermore, constitutive phosphorylation of TCR zeta in T cells occurred
independently of antigen stimulation and did not require CD4 or CD8 coreceptor
expression. In lymph node T cells that constitutively express
tyrosine-phosphorylated TCR zeta, there was a direct correlation between surface 
TCR-associated protein tyrosine kinase (PTK) activity and expression of phospho
zeta. TCR stimulation of these cells resulted in an increase in PTK activity that
coprecipitated with the surface TCR complex and a corresponding increase in the
levels of phospho zeta. TCR ligations also contributed to the detection of
several additional phosphoproteins that coprecipitated with surface TCR
complexes, including a 72-kDa tyrosine-phosphorylated protein. The presence of
TCR-associated PTK activity also correlated with the binding of a 72-kDa protein,
which became tyrosine phosphorylated in vitro kinase assays, to tyrosine
phosphorylated TCR zeta. The cytoplasmic region of the TCR zeta chain was
synthesized, tyrosine phosphorylated, and conjugated to Sepharose beads. Only
tyrosine-phosphorylated, not nonphosphorylated, TCR zeta beads were capable of
immunoprecipitating the 72-kDa protein from total cell lysates. This 72-kDa
protein is likely the murine equivalent of human PTK ZAP-70, which has been shown
to associate specifically with phospho zeta. These results suggest that
TCR-associated PTK activity is regulated, at least in part, by the tyrosine
phosphorylation status of TCR zeta.

DOI: 10.1128/mcb.13.9.5771 
PMCID: PMC360318
PMID: 7689151  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

