
1. Cancer Res. 1995 May 1;55(9):1911-6.

Rejection of tumors in mice with severe combined immunodeficiency syndrome
determined by the major histocompatibility complex. Class I expression on the
graft.

Glas R(1), Waldenström M, Höglund P, Klein G, Kärre K, Ljunggren HG.

Author information: 
(1)Microbiology and Tumor Biology Center, Karolinska Institute, Stockholm,
Sweden.

This study addresses the role of MHC class I molecules in the rejection of tumor 
grafts by SCID mice. Tumor cell lines, their corresponding MHC class I
transfectants, and MHC class I-deficient mutants were inoculated to SCID mice.
This allowed a study of tumor rejection responses in an environment with normal
numbers of natural killer cells but largely devoid of functional T and B cells.
C.B-17 (H-2d) SCID mice were found to reject low (10(2)) but not high (10(4))
doses of allogeneic (H-2b) tumor cells. The introduction of H-2Dd into such
allogeneic tumor cells abrogated the rejection response with progressive tumor
growth as a consequence. Introduction of H-2Kd or Ld had no or only marginal
effects. The protective ability of H-2Dd was mapped to the alpha 1/alpha 2
domains of the molecule. H-2Dd protected allogeneic tumors from rejection also in
C3H SCID mice of the H-2k haplotype, demonstrating that this ability was not
dependent on H-2Dd expression in the host. Expression of endogenous H-2Kb and/or 
Db molecules partially protected wild-type allogeneic tumor cells from rejection 
since mutant allogeneic cells, devoid of class I expression, were rejected even
after high-dose inoculation. Introduction of either allogeneic or xenogeneic
class I molecules did not lead to rejection of otherwise MHC class I syngeneic
(H-2d) tumor cells. The observed tumor cell rejection in SCID mice was dependent 
on natural killer cells. After depletion of asialo-GM1+ cells, all inoculated
tumor cell lines grew progressively, independently of MHC class I expression.
These results are compatible with a model where expression of certain, but not
all, class I molecules protect from natural killer cell-mediated rejection. There
was no evidence for rejection occurring as a consequence of the expression of
allogeneic or xenogeneic class I molecules on the grafted cells. MHC class I
expression may thus influence tumor cell recognition in mice lacking T-cell
receptor expression.


PMID: 7728758  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

