
1. J Exp Med. 1995 Feb 1;181(2):747-53.

Bacterial superantigens induce T cell expression of the skin-selective homing
receptor, the cutaneous lymphocyte-associated antigen, via stimulation of
interleukin 12 production.

Leung DY(1), Gately M, Trumble A, Ferguson-Darnell B, Schlievert PM, Picker LJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, National Jewish Center for Immunology and
Respiratory Medicine, Denver, Colorado 80206.

T lymphocyte infiltration is a prominent feature of the skin inflammation
associated with infections by toxin (superantigen)-secreting Staphylococcus
aureus or Streptococcus bacteria. The cutaneous lymphocyte-associated antigen
(CLA) has been hypothesized to be a homing receptor (HR) involved in selective
migration of memory/effector T cells to the skin. Since the expression of this
putative skin-selective HR is known to be under strict microenvironmental
control, we sought to determine the effect of staphylococcal and streptococcal
toxins on T cell expression of CLA. After in vitro stimulation of peripheral
blood mononuclear cells with staphylococcal enterotoxin B, toxic shock syndrome
toxin-1, and streptococcal pyrogenic exotoxins A and C, there was a significant
increase in the numbers of CLA+ T cell blasts (p < 0.01), but not blasts bearing 
the mucosa-associated adhesion molecule alpha e beta 7-integrin, compared with T 
cells stimulated with phytohemaglutinin (PHA) or anti-CD3. Bacterial toxins were 
also found to specifically induce interleukin (IL) 12 production. More
importantly, induction of toxin-induced CLA expression was blocked by anti-IL-12,
and the addition of IL-12 to PHA-stimulated T cells induced CLA, but not alpha e 
beta 7-integrin, expression. These data suggest that bacterial toxins induce the 
expansion of skin-homing CLA+ T cells in an IL-12-dependent manner, and thus may 
contribute to the development of skin rashes in superantigen-mediated diseases.

DOI: 10.1084/jem.181.2.747 
PMCID: PMC2191866
PMID: 7836926  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

