
1. J Exp Med. 1994 May 1;179(5):1539-49.

Resting and anergic B cells are defective in CD28-dependent costimulation of
naive CD4+ T cells.

Ho WY(1), Cooke MP, Goodnow CC, Davis MM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, Stanford University School of
Medicine, California 94305.

Successful antibody production in vivo depends on a number of cellular events,
one of the most important of these being cognate B cell-T cell interaction. To
examine this phenomenon in vitro, homogeneous populations of hen egg lysozyme
(HEL)-specific small resting B cells and naive CD4+ HEL-specific T cells (derived
from immunoglobulin [Ig] and T cell receptor transgenic mice, respectively) were 
cultured together. On addition of intact HEL protein. HEL-specific B cells
increase their expression of activation molecules, including a B7-related protein
and CD44, and enlarge into blast cells. Within the same cultures, HEL-specific
CD4+ T cells also increase expression of the activation markers CD69 and CD44,
enlarge, secrete lymphokines, and proliferate. This response is radiation
sensitive, supporting the conclusion that HEL-specific B cells present antigen to
and activate the naive T cells. By contrast, when a synthetic peptide fragment of
HEL is used to bypass B cell antigen-receptor engagement, the naive T cells
enlarge and display activation antigens, but fail to produce lymphokines,
proliferate, or promote B cell blastogenesis. Presentation of HEL by tolerant B
cells, which are no longer able to signal effectively through their antigen
receptors, results in an identical pattern of incomplete T cell activation.
Addition of a stimulating anti-CD28 antibody and blocking of CD28 signals with
CTLA4/Ig fusion protein both show that complete activation of naive CD4+ T cells 
depends on the initial induction of B7 and related costimulatory molecules after 
HEL binding to nontolerant HEL-specific B cells. Thus, in the absence of adequate
constimulation from the B cell, naive CD4+ T cells undergo a form of "partial
activation" in which they upregulate surface expression of certain T cell
activation antigens, but fail to efficiently produce lymphokine and proliferate. 
This may explain the different conclusions that have been reached regarding the
consequences of B cell antigen presentation to T cells, in that the ability of B 
cells to activate naive CD4+ T cells depends both on their specificity and their 
activation state.

DOI: 10.1084/jem.179.5.1539 
PMCID: PMC2191488
PMID: 7909325  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

