
1. Mol Microbiol. 1994 Apr;12(1):153-63.

A seven-gene operon essential for formate-dependent nitrite reduction to ammonia 
by enteric bacteria.

Hussain H(1), Grove J, Griffiths L, Busby S, Cole J.

Author information: 
(1)School of Biochemistry, University of Birmingham, UK.

The DNA sequence of the regulatory region and the structural gene, nrfA, for
cytochrome c552 of Escherichia coli K-12 have been reported. We have now
established that nrfA is the first gene in a seven-gene operon, designated the
nrf operon, at least five of which are essential for formate-dependent nitrite
reduction to ammonia. This operon terminates just upstream of the previously
sequenced gltP gene encoding a sodium-independent, glutamate and aspartate
transporter. Expression of lac fused to nrfA, nrfE or nrfG is regulated by oxygen
repression, FNR-dependent anaerobic induction, nitrite induction and nitrate
repression during anaerobic growth, exactly as previously reported for the nrfA
promoter. In contrast, expression of the gltP-lac fusion was FNR-independent. The
open reading frame immediately downstream of nrfA encodes NrfB, a hydrophilic,
penta-haem cytochrome c with an M(r) of 20,714. The structure of the N-terminal
region is typical of a signal peptide for a periplasmic protein: cleavage at the 
putative signal peptide cleavage site, Ala-26, would result in a periplasmic
cytochrome with a molecular mass of 18 kDa. The NrfC polypeptide, M(r) 24,567,
contains 16 cysteine residues arranged in four clusters typical of the CooF
super-family of non-haem iron-sulphur proteins. The NrfD sequence predicts a
318-residue hydrophobic protein with a distribution of acidic and basic amino
acids which suggests that NrfD is an integral transmembrane protein with loops in
both the periplasm and the cytoplasm. Proteins most similar to NrfD include the
PsrC subunit of polysulphide reductase from Wolinella, but, as seven of the 10
most similar proteins are NADH-ubiquinone oxidoreductases, we propose that NrfD
participates in the transfer of electrons from the quinone pool into the terminal
components of the Nrf pathway. NrfE, M(r) 60,851, is predicted to be another
hydrophobic, integral membrane protein homologous to the CdI1 protein of
Rhodobacter capsulatus, which has been implicated in the assembly of periplasmic 
c-type cytochromes. The sequence of the 127 residue NrfF polypeptide, M(r)
14,522, is strikingly similar to the CcI2 protein of R. capsulatus, especially in
the putative haem-binding motif, RCPQCQNQN.(ABSTRACT TRUNCATED AT 400 WORDS)

DOI: 10.1111/j.1365-2958.1994.tb01004.x 
PMID: 8057835  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

