
1. Crit Rev Microbiol. 1994;20(2):87-93.

The Clostridium cellulovorans cellulosome.

Doi RH(1), Goldstein M, Hashida S, Park JS, Takagi M.

Author information: 
(1)Section of Molecular and Cellular Biology, University of California, Davis
95616.

The Clostridium cellulovorans cellulosome is comprised of a large, nonenzymatic
scaffolding protein called the cellulose binding protein A (CbpA) and a number of
endoglucanases/xylanases. The CbpA contains several functional domains, including
a signal peptide, a cellulose binding domain (CBD), a hydrophilic domain (HLD)
present four times, and a hydrophobic domain (HBD) present nine times. The
functions of the domains were studied by the construction of minigenes containing
the putative functional domains and by expression of the minigenes in Escherichia
coli. The purified product of the CBD was able to bind to various crystalline
forms of cellulose and chitin with a Kd of 1 microM. The binding capacity for CBD
was a function of the crystallinity of the cellulose sample. Furthermore, the
binding of CBD to Avicel was not inhibited by cellobiose or
carboxymethylcellulose, suggesting that the CBD binding target was a
three-dimensional structure found only in crystalline forms of cellulose. The HBD
was tested for its ability to bind endoglucanases by an interaction Western as
well as a sandwich enzyme immunoassay technique. The HBD was able to bind both
EngB and EngD, indicating that the HBD contained an endoglucanase binding domain 
(EBD). Because there are nine EBD domains, it is possible that CbpA can bind up
to nine endoglucanases. The role of the HLDs remains elusive. The data indicate
that the cellulosome is a complex enzyme containing a scaffolding protein (CbpA) 
to which is attached a number of endoglucanase molecules. This arrangement allows
the complex to bind and degrade crystalline cellulose, which resists degradation 
by the free forms of cellulosomal endoglucanases.

DOI: 10.3109/10408419409113548 
PMID: 8080629  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

