
1. Cell Immunol. 1994 Oct 1;158(1):116-30.

Costimulatory signals modulate the antiproliferative effects of agents that
elevate cAMP in T cells.

Bartik MM(1), Bauman GP, Brooks WH, Roszman TL.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, College of Medicine, University of 
Kentucky, Lexington 40536.

Stimulation of highly purified human T cells with immobilized anti-CD3 monoclonal
antibody (mAb) in the presence of cAMP-inducing agents results in inhibition of
proliferation by these T cells. In the present study, experiments were performed 
to determine how costimulatory signals modulate the inhibitory effects of
cAMP-elevating agents on proliferation and interleukin 2 (IL-2) secretion by
anti-CD3 mAb-stimulated T cells. Accordingly, the level of anti-CD3 mAb-induced T
cell proliferation was determined in the presence or absence of accessory cells, 
anti-CD28 mAb, or phorbol myristic acid (PMA) in the presence of the adenylyl
cyclase (AC)-linked receptor agonists prostaglandin E2 (PGE2), or isoproterenol
(ISO) as well as the AC activator forskolin (FSK) or the cAMP analog
dibutyryl-cAMP (dB-cAMP). While all three costimulators enhanced the level of
anti-CD3 mAb-induced T cell proliferation and IL-2 secretion, they were variable 
in their ability to overcome the immunosuppressive effects of the cAMP elevating 
agents. The order of potency of the costimulatory signals in reversing the
inhibitory effects of cAMP-elevating agents on anti-CD3 mAb-induced T cell
proliferation and IL-2 secretion was PMA > accessory cells > anti-CD28 mAb.
Differences were noted in the ability of the costimulatory signals to overcome
the immunosuppressive effects of the various cAMP-inducing agents. Thus, the
effects of PGE2 or ISO on T cell proliferation or IL-2 secretion were more
readily overcome by costimulatory signals than those elicited by FSK or dB-cAMP. 
Experiments designed to investigate the mechanisms involved in these effects
showed that neither accessory cells nor anti-CD28 mAb altered the level of cAMP
accumulation or protein kinase A (PKA) activity in T cells stimulated with
cAMP-elevating agents. However, PMA was found to decrease both cAMP accumulation 
and PKA activity in T cells stimulated with PGE2 or ISO but not FSK. These
results suggest that the overall immunosuppressive effects of naturally occurring
substances such as PGE2 or catecholamines may be altered by costimulatory signals
when antigen-specific T cells interact with antigen-presenting cells.

DOI: 10.1006/cimm.1994.1261 
PMID: 8087859  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

