
1. Eur J Immunol. 1993 Jul;23(7):1513-22.

Activation with superantigens induces programmed death in antigen-primed CD4+
class II+ major histocompatibility complex T lymphocytes via a
CD11a/CD18-dependent mechanism.

Damle NK(1), Leytze G, Klussman K, Ledbetter JA.

Author information: 
(1)Bristol-Myers Squibb Pharmaceutical Research Institute, Seattle.

Staphylococcal enterotoxin superantigens (SAg) bind class II major
histocompatibility complex (MHC) molecules on antigen-presenting cells (APC) and 
upon cell-to-cell contact stimulate proliferation of T cells expressing
appropriate V beta gene products. In addition, SAg can also deliver negative
signals to Ag-specific T cells resulting in a state of unresponsiveness or a loss
of viability. The present study examines the functional consequences of a direct 
interaction of SAg with alloAg-specific class II MHC+ CD4+ T cell lines (TCL).
Our results demonstrate that SAg induce programmed death (apoptosis) in a
majority of Ag-specific CD4+ T cells accompanied by genomic DNA fragmentation.
SAg binding to Ag-specific TCL resulted in a rapid mobilization of intracellular 
free calcium ([Ca2+]i) and transcription of a number of cytokine genes including 
interleukin-2(IL-2), IL-4, interferon-gamma (IFN-gamma), granulocyte-macrophage
colony-stimulating factor (GM-CSF), and granzyme B indicating the activation of
primed T cells. Both SAg-induced cytokine gene expression as well as subsequent
death were significantly inhibited by a tyrosine kinase inhibitor herbimycin A
and also by cyclosporin A. SAg-induced death of primed T cells was also inhibited
by monoclonal antibodies (mAb) directed at the CD11a/CD18 molecule but not those 
reactive with other T cell surface molecules such as CD2, CD7, CD28, CD29 or
CD49d. None of these mAb, including anti-CD11a/CD18, had any effect on
SAg-induced expression of IL-2 and IL-4 genes or SAg-induced [Ca2+]i response.
Addition of cytokines such as IL-1 alpha, IL-2, IL-4, IL-6, GM-CSF, IFN-gamma,
tumor necrosis factor (TNF-alpha, or TNF-beta), or neutralizing Ab to these
cytokines had no effect on SAg-induced death of Ag-specific TCL. The T cells
which survived the death-inducing effects of SAg showed down-regulation of the
CD3/T cell receptor and up-regulation of CD2 and HLA-DR expression, and upon
re-exposure to the same SAg upregulated expression of mRNA for IL-2 and
IFN-gamma. Presentation of SAg by B7+ ICAM-1+ LFA-3+ DR+ professional APC was
also able to induce the death of Ag-specific TCL. Together these results suggest 
that the activation with SAg causes programmed death of Ag-specific TCL cells via
a mechanism that requires late participation of the CD11a/CD18 molecule.

DOI: 10.1002/eji.1830230718 
PMID: 8100773  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

