
1. Mol Immunol. 1994 Feb;31(3):227-40.

Differential susceptibility of immune complexes to release from the erythrocyte
CR1 receptor by factor I.

Yokoyama I(1), Waxman F.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, University of Oklahoma Health
Sciences Center, Oklahoma City 73190.

This study was designed to explore the role of Factor I in the release of immune 
complexes (IC) from human erythrocytes (E). The interactions between E and IC
constructed with murine monoclonal antibodies were examined using, as a
complement source, autologous plasma, plasma depleted of Factor I by > 90%, or
Factor I-depleted plasma reconstituted with purified Factor I. Striking
differences were observed in the interactions between E and different types of IC
in Factor I-depleted plasma. The release of IC constructed with IgG1, IgG3, IgM
or IgA antibodies was abolished by Factor I depletion whereas IC containing IgG2a
or IgG2b antibodies were still released from E in Factor I-depleted plasma.
Moreover, when IC containing IgG2a antibodies were incubated briefly in Factor
I-depleted plasma, under conditions in which the IC were bound but not released, 
and then resuspended in the presence or absence of Factor I, as little as 5% of
the normal physiologic level of Factor I released the IC from E. Thus, IC
containing IgG2a antibodies appear to be exquisitely susceptible to release from 
E by Factor I. Additional differences in the susceptibility of IC containing
IgG1, IgG3, IgM or IgA antibodies to release from E were revealed when Factor
I-depleted plasma was reconstituted with Factor I. Under these conditions, the
relative susceptibility of IC to release was: IC containing IgG1 or IgA
antibodies > IC containing IgM antibodies > IC constructed with IgG3 antibodies. 
While isotype was critical in determining susceptibility to release, some
clonotypic differences between isotype-matched pairs of IC were also evident.
Differences in IC release from E by Factor I may reflect antibody matrix-mediated
differential susceptibility of IC-bound C3b and/or C4b to cleavage by Factor I
and may have implications for immunoregulation, host effector cell mechanisms and
the pathophysiology of IC diseases.

DOI: 10.1016/0161-5890(94)90003-5 
PMID: 8114768  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

