
1. Infect Immun. 1994 Apr;62(4):1444-50.

Cytokine gene expression by cultures of human lymphocytes with autologous
Mycobacterium tuberculosis-infected monocytes.

Johnson BJ(1), McMurray DN.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Cellular Physiology and Immunology, Rockefeller University, New 
York, New York 10021.

In order to better understand the immunoregulation following Mycobacterium
tuberculosis infection, cytokine mRNA induction in response to in vitro infection
of human monocytes with live virulent M. tuberculosis H37Rv cocultured with
autologous lymphocytes was quantitated by reverse transcriptase-PCR. Induced
levels of interleukin 1 beta (IL-1 beta), IL-2, tumor necrosis factor alpha, and 
gamma interferon (IFN-gamma) were compared among groups of individuals
representing three phases of immunity to infection with M. tuberculosis: naive
normal control subjects, purified protein derivative (PPD)-reactive normal
donors, and individuals with active tuberculosis (TB [diseased]). Levels of IL-1 
beta and tumor necrosis factor alpha mRNA in cocultured cells from TB patients
were 51 and 45%, respectively, of those obtained in cells from sensitized healthy
volunteers and were comparable to those from naive normal donors.
Lymphoproliferative responses to M. tuberculosis and induction of the T-cell
cytokine IL-2 were predictably high in the cells of PPD-sensitized donors, low in
normal naive individuals, and variable among TB patients. In contrast, the
induced level of another lymphokine, IFN-gamma, did not follow the pattern seen
in IL-2 induction. Infection with live M. tuberculosis induced high levels of
IFN-gamma mRNA in lymphocytes of both PPD-sensitized and normal naive donors
compared with those of TB patients. Interestingly, polyclonal stimulation with
the mitogen concanavalin A induced similar IFN-gamma levels in cells from all
three donor groups. The high level of IFN-gamma induced by the infection of
monocytes from naive normal donors suggests a role for natural killer (NK) cells 
in the production of IFN-gamma in this coculture system. This response appears
independent of the role performed by T cells.

DOI: 10.1128/IAI.62.4.1444-1450.1994 
PMCID: PMC186300
PMID: 8132351  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

