
1. Mol Cell Biol. 1994 Apr;14(4):2378-90.

A segment of mRNA encoding the leader peptide of the CPA1 gene confers repression
by arginine on a heterologous yeast gene transcript.

Delbecq P(1), Werner M, Feller A, Filipkowski RK, Messenguy F, Piérard A.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratoire de Microbiologie, Université Libre de Bruxelles, Belgium.

The expression of the yeast gene CPA1, which encodes the small subunit of the
arginine pathway carbamoylphosphate synthetase, is repressed by arginine at a
translational level. CPA1 mRNA contains a 250-nucleotide-long leader which
includes a 25-codon upstream open reading frame (uORF). Oligonucleotide
site-directed mutagenesis of this uORF as well as sequencing of constitutive
cis-dominant mutations has suggested that the leader peptide product of the CPA1 
uORF is an essential negative element for repression of the CPA1 gene by
arginine. In this work, a series of deletions affecting the regions 5' and 3' to 
the uORF in the leader sequence was constructed. The arginine-dependent
repression of CPA1 was little affected in these constructions, indicating that
these regions are not essential for the regulatory response. This conclusion was 
further supported by the finding that inserting the mRNA segment encoding the
leader peptide sequence of CPA1 in the leader sequence of another gene, namely,
GCN4, places this gene under arginine repression. Similarly, the behavior of
fusions of the leader sequence of CPA1 with those of ARG4 or GAL10 confirmed that
the regions of this leader located upstream and downstream from the uORF are
dispensable for the regulation by arginine. Finally, a set of substitution
mutations which modify the uORF nucleotide sequence while leaving unchanged the
corresponding amino acid sequence was constructed. The mutations did not affect
the repression of CPA1 by arginine. The data presented in this paper consequently
agree with the conclusion that the leader peptide itself is the main element
required for the translational repression of CPA1.

DOI: 10.1128/mcb.14.4.2378 
PMCID: PMC358605
PMID: 8139542  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

