
1. J Cell Sci. 1994 Jan;107 ( Pt 1):29-37.

Up-regulation of the connexin43+ gap junction network in haemopoietic tissue
before the growth of stem cells.

Rosendaal M(1), Green CR, Rahman A, Morgan D.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Anatomy and Developmental Biology, University College London,
UK.

The early developmental stages of haemopoiesis are thought to be regulated by
paracrine growth factors and by the haemopoietic environment. Are gap junctions
involved here? Gap junctions are structures in cell membranes allowing the direct
transfer of ions and small molecules between adjacent cells and are known to be
involved in development. We have found that although connexin43 gap junctions are
rare (0.00016 +/- 0.0002/microns2 tissue) in normal adult mouse marrow their
expression is 80-fold higher (0.0292 +/- 0.0147/microns2) in neonatal marrow. One
difference between neonatal and adult haemopoietic tissue is that in the latter
more haemopoietic cells are dividing. To test if more gap junctions were due to
increased division we altered adult blood-formation by mobilizing or destroying
end cells--granulocytes and red cells--or by forcing stem cells to divide by
making them regenerate an ablated blood-forming system. Mobilizing end cells had 
no effect on the number or distribution of gap junctions in marrow but forced
stem cell division caused a 100-fold increase in gap junction expression and did 
so before any recognizable haemopoietic cells formed. There were greater than
normal numbers of gap junctions in radio-protected adult mouse marrow. The cells 
coupled by gap junctions are TE-7+ mesodermally derived fibroblasts, STRO-1+
stromal cells, and CD45+ and CD34+ haemopoietic cells. We propose that there is a
latent network of Cx43+ gap junctions in normal quiescent marrow. In response to 
events that call for active division of stem cells this network is amplified and 
coupled to haemopoietic stem cells, perhaps enabling them to divide.


PMID: 8175916  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

