
1. J Exp Med. 1993 Aug 1;178(2):633-42.

Small amounts of superantigen, when presented on dendritic cells, are sufficient 
to initiate T cell responses.

Bhardwaj N(1), Young JW, Nisanian AJ, Baggers J, Steinman RM.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Cellular Physiology and Immunology, Rockefeller University, New 
York, New York.

Dendritic cells are potent antigen-presenting cells for several primary immune
responses and therefore provide an opportunity for evaluating the amounts of
cell-associated antigens that are required for inducing T cell-mediated immunity.
Because dendritic cells express very high levels of major histocompatibility
complex (MHC) class II products, it has been assumed that high levels of ligands 
bound to MHC products ("signal one") are needed to stimulate quiescent T cells.
Here we describe quantitative aspects underlying the stimulation of human blood T
cells by a bacterial superantigen, staphylococcal enterotoxin A (SEA). The
advantages of superantigens for quantitative studies of signal one are that these
ligands: (a) engage MHC class II and the T cell receptor but do not require
processing; (b) are efficiently presented to large numbers of quiescent T cells; 
and (c) can be pulsed onto dendritic cells before their application to T cells.
Thus one can relate amounts of dendritic cell-associated SEA to subsequent
lymphocyte stimulation. Using radioiodinated SEA, we noted that dendritic cells
can bind 30-200 times more superantigen than B cells and monocytes. Nevertheless,
this high SEA binding does not underlie the strong potency of dendritic cells to 
present antigen to T cells. Dendritic cells can sensitize quiescent T cells,
isolated using monoclonals to appropriate CD45R epitopes, after a pulse of SEA
that occupies a maximum of 0.1% of surface MHC class II molecules. This
corresponds to an average of 2,000 molecules per dendritic cell. At these low
doses of bound SEA, monoclonal antibodies to CD3, CD4, and CD28 almost completely
block T cell proliferation. In addition to suggesting new roles for MHC class II 
on dendritic cells, especially the capture and retention of ligands at low
external concentrations, the data reveal that primary T cells can generate a
response to exceptionally low levels of signal one as long as these are delivered
on dendritic cells.

DOI: 10.1084/jem.178.2.633 
PMCID: PMC2191121
PMID: 8340760  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

