
1. Eur J Immunol. 1993 Sep;23(9):2306-10.

Role of transforming growth factor-beta in the preferential induction of T helper
cells of type 1 by staphylococcal enterotoxin B.

Nagelkerken L(1), Gollob KJ, Tielemans M, Coffman RL.

Author information: 
(1)TNO Institute for Aging and Vascular Research, Leiden, The Netherlands.

Stimulation of murine CD4+ T cells with staphylococcal enterotoxin B (SEB)
results in the preferential development of T helper (Th) 1 cells [i.e. high
interferon (IFN)-gamma and low interleukin (IL)-4, IL-5 and IL-10]; whereas in
response to plate-bound anti-CD3 or anti-T cell receptor-alpha beta, Th1 as well 
as Th2 cells develop. In the present study, we examined the mechanism which is
responsible for the selective Th1 development in the SEB system. The addition of 
IL-4 resulted in a strong development of Th2 cells showing that SEB stimulation
can result in Th2 differentiation. Co-stimulation with anti-CD28 was insufficient
in this regard. Lack of Th2 development in the SEB system was in part due to the 
inhibitory effect of endogenously produced transforming growth factor-beta
(TGF-beta), because anti-TGF-beta allowed the development of Th2 cells.
Similarly, TGF-beta inhibited Th2 development and stimulated Th1 development in
the anti-CD3 system. This shift was only partially prevented by also including
IL-4 in the cultures. The effects of TGF-beta could only partially be explained
by stimulation of IFN-gamma or inhibition of IL-4 as intermediatory cytokines:
(1) TGF-beta stimulated Th1 development even in the presence of anti-IL-4 and
anti-IFN-gamma, and (2) a strong inhibitory effect of anti-TGF-beta on Th1
development was still observed when anti-IL-4 and IFN-gamma were simultaneously
added to the cultures. It is concluded that SEB favors Th1 development by
stimulation of TGF-beta production. Inhibition of Th2 development by TGF-beta is 
due, in part, to inhibition of IL-4 and stimulation of IFN-gamma, and, in part,
to a direct effect of TGF-beta on the responding T cells.

DOI: 10.1002/eji.1830230938 
PMID: 8370407  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

