
1. Salud Publica Mex. 1993 Jan-Feb;35(1):27-38.

[Effectiveness of a carbamate insecticide as a household low-volume spray for
malaria control].

[Article in Spanish]

Arredondo-Jiménez JI(1), Loyola EG, Rodríguez MH, Danis-Lozano R, Fuentes G,
Villarreal C.

Author information: 
(1)Centro de Investigación de Paludismo, Dirección General de Epidemiología,
Secretaría de Salud, México.

A comparative regional-scale evaluation of the epidemiological impact of low
volume (LV) spray of bendiocarb and the conventional spray of DDT against malaria
in an endemic area of northern Chiapas was carried out. Three Anopheline species 
were found: Anopheles pseudopunctipennis, An. albinanus and An. argyritarsis. The
most prevalent was An. pseudopunctipennis, a species we suspect may be involved
in the transmission of most malaria cases. This species showed high levels of
resistance to DDT. However, this insecticide had a long residual effect in wall
bioassays, with mortalities > or = 95 per cent for up to 21 weeks in wood, sticks
and plaster. Susceptibility to bendiocarb was total, and mortality to LV
bendiocarb was > or = 75 per cent for up to 16 weeks in wood, sticks and straw.
Very low numbers of mosquitoes were found throughout the evaluation, although
malaria transmission continued in control villages (sprayed with DDT), as well as
treated villages (sprayed with LV bendiocarb). No plasmodium infected mosquitoes 
were found, perhaps due to a very small sample size. The LV spray methodology was
found to be 1.7 times more effective than conventional spraying in reducing
malaria incidence. A net reduction of 1.6 times in insecticide application time
was also found, which would allow spraying at the right time, especially when
urgent control measures have to be applied, such as in malaria outbreaks.
Finally, the new methodology costs 2.2 times more than the conventional ddt
spraying, but if the potential of using spray workers in other activities is
considered, costs would be comparable to those of DDT spraying.


PMID: 8470018  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

