
1. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 1993 Apr 15;90(8):3343-7.

The nucleotide in position 32 of the tRNA anticodon loop determines ability of
anticodon UCC to discriminate among glycine codons.

Lustig F(1), Borén T, Claesson C, Simonsson C, Barciszewska M, Lagerkvist U.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Biochemistry, University of Göteborg, Sweden.

We have investigated the influence of structures in the tRNA anticodon loop and
stem on the ability of the anticodon to discriminate among codons. We had
previously shown that anticodon UCC, when placed in the structural context of
tRNA(Gly1) from Escherichia coli, discriminated efficiently between the glycine
codons, as required by the wobble rules. Thus, this anticodon read GGA and GGG
but did not read GGU and GGC, whereas in mycoplasma tRNA(Gly), the same anticodon
did not discriminate among the glycine codons. We have now determined the reading
properties of three constructions based on tRNA(Gly1) containing the anticodon
UCC in different structural contexts. In one of these constructs, tRNA(Gly1-ASL),
the anticodon loop and stem are the same as in mycoplasma tRNA(Gly). The second
construct, tRNA(Gly1-AS), has an anticodon stem identical with the mycoplasma
tRNA(Gly), whereas in the last construct, tRNA(Gly1-C32), the only difference
from tRNA(Gly1)(UCC) is that the uridine in position 32 of the anticodon loop has
been replaced by cytidine. These constructs were tested for ability to read
glycine codons in an in vitro protein-synthesizing system that allowed us to
monitor separately the reading of each codon. We found that the anticodon UCC,
when present in tRNA(Gly1-AS), discriminated among the glycine codons, whereas in
the constructs tRNA(Gly1-ASL) and tRNA(Gly1-C32), the same anticodon had lost its
ability to discriminate--i.e., it behaved as in mycoplasma tRNA(Gly). These
results strongly suggest that nt 32 of the anticodon loop of tRNA(Gly1)(UCC)
decisively influences the reading properties of the anticodon UCC.

DOI: 10.1073/pnas.90.8.3343 
PMCID: PMC46296
PMID: 8475078  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

