
1. Infect Immun. 1993 Jul;61(7):2793-802.

Localization of the ActA polypeptide of Listeria monocytogenes in infected tissue
culture cell lines: ActA is not associated with actin "comets".

Niebuhr K(1), Chakraborty T, Rohde M, Gazlig T, Jansen B, Köllner P, Wehland J.

Author information: 
(1)Abteilung Mikrobiologie, Gesellschaft für Biotechnologische Forschung mbH,
Braunschweig, Germany.

The ActA protein of the gram-positive pathogen Listeria monocytogenes is a 90-kDa
polypeptide required for interaction of the bacteria with components of the host 
cell microfilament system to generate intra- and intercellular movement. To study
the localization, distribution, and expression of the ActA polypeptide in L.
monocytogenes grown either in broth culture or in infected tissue culture cells, 
we first isolated ActA by monoclonal antibody-based immunoaffinity
chromatography. Polyclonal rabbit antisera raised against purified ActA revealed 
that ActA was associated with the cell wall and exposed on the surface of the
bacteria, readily accessible to ActA antibodies. In contrast, a C-terminally
truncated ActA1 polypeptide expressed by the isogenic actA1 mutant was detected
only in the supernatant fluids. Immunofluorescence microscopy and electron
microscopic studies using immunogold labeling showed that ActA was present on the
surface of the bacteria infecting PtK2 and J774 cells at all stages of the
infection cycle and was not found to be associated with the actin "tail" of
individual bacteria. For the isogenic actA1 mutant strain, which grew as
microcolonies within infected cells, only diffuse staining of the secreted ActA1 
polypeptide in the host cytoplasm was observed. The ActA polypeptide therefore
appears to be required in the initiation of actin accumulation by the bacterium
and is apparently not directly involved in the generation of the actin tail.
Analysis of strains of several L. monocytogenes serotypes indicated
microheterogeneity in the molecular weights of the ActA polypeptides of
individual strains and led to the detection of a serotype 3a strain that does not
produce ActA.

DOI: 10.1128/IAI.61.7.2793-2802.1993 
PMCID: PMC280923
PMID: 8514381  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

