
1. J Chromatogr A. 1995 Nov 3;715(2):247-58.

Unusual chromatographic behaviour and one-step purification of a novel membrane
proteinase from Bacillus cereus.

Fricke B(1), Buchmann T, Friebe S.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Physiological Chemistry, Medical Faculty, Martin Luther
University Halle-Wittenberg, Germany.

Cell envelopes of Bacillus cereus contain a casein-cleaving membrane proteinase
(CCMP) and an insulin-cleaving membrane proteinase (ICMP), which differ in their 
substrate and inhibitor specificity from all Bacillus proteinases described
previously. They remained localized in the cytoplasmic membrane after treatment
with lysozyme and mutanolysin and they are strongly attached to the membrane
compared with other known membrane proteinases. Only high a concentration of the 
Zwitterionic detergent sulfobetain SB-12 enabled an effective solubilization of
both membrane proteinases. The usual conventional purification methods, such as
chromatofocusing, ion-exchange chromatography and hydrophobic interaction
chromatography in the presence of detergent concentrations beyond their critical 
micelle concentration, could not be applied to the purification, because the
solubilized membrane proteinases bound strongly and irreversibly to the
chromatographic matrix. In the search for other purification methods, we used a
tentacle ion-exchanger (EMD trimethylaminoethyl-Fractogel) to reduce the
hydrophobic interactions between the proteinases and the matrix. All
contaminating proteins could be removed by a first gradient of sodium chloride
without elution of CCMP; a second gradient with isopropanol and a decreasing salt
concentration resulted in an efficiently purified CCMP. The ICMP was irreversibly
denaturated. Purified CCMP is a member of the metalloproteinase family with a pH 
optimum in the neutral range and a temperature optimum of 40 degrees C, whose
properties differ from the serine-type membrane proteinase of Bacillus subtilis
described by Shimizu et al. [Agric. Biol. Chem., 47 (1983) 1775]. It consists of 
two subunits in sodiumdodecyl sulfate-polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis
(SDS-PAGE) under reducing conditions (Mr 53,000 and 65,000); however, the
molecular mass of the purified enzyme could not be determined by size exclusion
or SDS-PAGE, because the purified enzyme aggregated at the top of the gel matrix.
CCMP solubilized before the purification process, could be eluted in the presence
of 0.1% octylphenol-poly(ethyleneglycol ether)9-10 (Triton X-100) in two peaks of
Mr 56,000 and 128,000, respectively. We discuss this special chromatographic
behaviour of the CCMP from Bacillus cereus, with regard to the strong hydrophobic
interactions of the enzyme with the chromatographic matrix and additional
self-aggregation, which could only be dissolved by solvents such as isopropanol.

DOI: 10.1016/0021-9673(95)00624-v 
PMID: 8520670  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

