
1. Transplantation. 1996 Apr 15;61(7):989-96.

Characterization of baboon class I major histocompatibility molecules.
Implications for baboon-to-human xenotransplantation.

Prilliman K(1), Lawlor D, Ellexson M, McElwee N, Confer D, Cooper DK, Kennedy RC,
Hildebrand W.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology, University of Oklahoma Health Sciences Center,
Oklahoma City 73190, USA.

Increasingly strong medical and political pressures are stimulating consideration
of the transplantation of baboon organs and cells into humans. Critical to the
success of these xenotransplants is management of the immune system such that
graft rejection and, in the case of bone marrow transplantation,
graft-versus-host disease do not result in transplant failure. The polymorphic
products of the major histocompatibility complex (MHC) are the primary barrier to
successful allotransplantation, and here we describe class I MHC molecules from
baboon (Papio anubis) to gain an understanding of how similarities and
differences between baboon and human MHC molecules might affect xenograft
survival and function. Comparative analyses of our five novel baboon class I
molecules with defined HLA class I molecules demonstrate that the baboon class I 
molecule are up to 90% identical. Disparity between baboon class I proteins and
their human homologues lies predominately at positions in the antigen-binding
groove, while C-terminal portions of the class I heavy chain are more conserved
between the two species. Such concentration of cross-species differences within
the alpha1 and alpha2 domains involves a majority of substitutions at positions
demonstrating polymorphism in human alleles; the location of substitutions
distinguishing baboon and human molecules thus resembles the positioning of human
class I allopolymorphisms. Because this preliminary characterization indicates
that both baboon and human T cells with be restricted by xenogeneic class I
molecules, immune responses triggered during baboon-to-human transplantation
should mimic those arising during MHC mismatched human allotransplantation.

DOI: 10.1097/00007890-199604150-00001 
PMID: 8623205  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

