
1. J Biol Chem. 1996 May 10;271(19):11309-16.

Isolation and characterization of a disulfide-linked human stem cell factor
dimer. Biochemical, biophysical, and biological comparison to the noncovalently
held dimer.

Lu HS(1), Jones MD, Shieh JH, Mendiaz EA, Feng D, Watler P, Narhi LO, Langley KE.

Author information: 
(1)Amgen Inc., Amgen Center, Thousand Oaks, California 91320, USA.

Distinct from the noncovalently linked recombinant human stem call factor (rhSCF)
dimer, we report here the isolation and identification of an SDS-nondissociable
dimer produced during folding/oxidation of rhSCF. Experimental evidence using
various cleavage strategies and analyses shows that the isolated dimer is
composed of two rhSCF monomers covalently linked by four disulfide bonds. The
cysteines are paired as in the noncovalently associated dimer except that all
pairings are intermolecular rather than intramolecular. Other structural models, 
involving intertwining of intramolecular disulfide loops, are ruled out. The
molecule behaves similarly to the noncovalently associated dimer during
ion-exchange or gel permeation chromatography. However, the disulfide-linked
dimer exhibits increased hydrophobicity in reverse-phase columns and in the
native state does not undergo spontaneous dimer dissociation-association as seen 
for the noncovalent dimer. Spectroscopic analyses indicate that the
disulfide-linked and noncovalently associated rhSCF dimers have grossly similar
secondary and tertiary structures. In vitro, the disulfide-linked dimer exhibits 
approximately 3-fold higher biological activity in supporting growth of a
hematopoietic cell line and stimulating hematopoietic cell colony formation from 
enriched human CD34+ cells. The molecule binds to the rhSCF receptor, Kit, with
an efficiency only half that of the noncovalently associated dimer. Formation of 
intermolecular disulfides in the disulfide-linked dimer with retention of
biological activity has implications for the three-dimensional structure of
noncovalently held dimer and disulfide-linked dimer.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.271.19.11309 
PMID: 8626683  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

