
1. J Exp Med. 1996 Feb 1;183(2):611-20.

Dominant-negative zeta-associated protein 70 inhibits T cell antigen receptor
signaling.

Qian D(1), Mollenauer MN, Weiss A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, Howard Hughes Medical Institute,
University of California, San Francisco 94143, USA.

Zeta-associated protein (ZAP)-70 is a cytoplasmic protein tyrosine required for T
cell antigen receptor (TCR) signaling and development. Mutations in ZAP-70 result
in severe combined immunodeficiency in humans. ZAP-70 interacts with the TCR by
binding to tyrosine-phosphorylated immunoreceptor tyrosine-based activation
motifs (ITAMs) present in the invariant subunits of the TCR complex. Here we
report that two ZAP-70 mutants devoid of kinase activity, generated either by a
point mutation in the kinase domain to create an inactive kinase, or by
truncation of the entire kinase domain (SH2[N+C]), functioned as
dominant-negative mutants to specifically suppress TCR-mediated activation of
NFAT, a nuclear factor essential for inducible interleukin 2 gene expression.
Biochemical studies with the SH2(N+C) mutant showed that it also blocked early
TCR signaling events, such as p95vav tyrosine phosphorylation, extracellular
signal-regulated kinase 2 activation, and the association of a number of
tyrosine-phosphorylated proteins with growth factor receptor-binding protein 2
(GRB2). The inhibitory effects of the SH2(N+C) mutant revealed that it requires
an intact phosphotyrosine-binding site in its COOH-terminal SH2 domain. Using a
CD8-zeta chimeric receptor to analyze the interaction of the SH2(N+C) mutant with
ITAMs of TCR-zeta, we found that this mutant was constitutively bound to the
hyperphosphorylated CD8-zeta chimera. These results indicate that
tyrosine-phosphorylated ITAM is the target for the action of this
dominant-negative mutant, suggesting that the assembly of a functional receptor
signaling complex on ITAMs is a critical proximal TCR signaling event leading to 
downstream activation.

DOI: 10.1084/jem.183.2.611 
PMCID: PMC2192449
PMID: 8627172  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

