
1. Biochemistry. 1996 Feb 6;35(5):1417-22.

Biochemical evidence for the formation of a covalent acyl-phosphate linkage
between UDP-N-acetylmuramate and ATP in the Escherichia coli
UDP-N-acetylmuramate:L-alanine ligase-catalyzed reaction.

Falk PJ(1), Ervin KM, Volk KS, Ho HT.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology, Bristol-Myers Squibb Pharmaceutical Research
Institute, Wallingford, Connecticut 06492, USA.

In the peptidoglycan biosynthesis pathway in Escherichia coli,
UDP-N-acetylmuramate:L-alanine ligase (MurC) catalyzes the formation of
UDP-N-acetylmuramyl-L-alanine. A peptide bond is formed in this reaction and an
ATP molecule is hydrolyzed concomitantly to produce ADP and orthophosphate. A
biochemical approach was devised to elucidate the role of ATP in this reaction. A
fusion construct pMAL::murC was prepared and the maltose binding
protein--UDP-N-acetylmuramyl:L-alanine ligase fusion protein was overproduced in 
E. coli/pMal::murC upon isopropyl beta-thiogalactoside induction. The fusion
protein was purified to > or = 90% homogeneity by a single-step affinity
chromatography. Subsequently, the ligase was released from the maltose binding
protein by proteolytic cleavage and was purified to > or = 95% homogeneity by an 
ion-exchange chromatographic step. The kinetic parameters of the regenerated
ligase are comparable to those of the purified native enzyme. This ligase was
used to investigate the role that ATP plays in the formation of
UDP-N-acetylmuramyl-L-alanine. UDP-N-acetyl[18O]muramate (with 18O located at the
carboxylate function only) was prepared by a combination of chemical and
enzymatic processes and was used as the substrate of the ligase to probe the
reaction mechanism. All reaction products were purified and subjected to liquid
chromatographic-mass spectrometric analysis. A single [18O]oxygen was transferred
from UDP-N-acetyl[18O]muramate to the orthophosphate produced in the reaction. No
[18O]oxygen was detected in the adenosine nucleotides recovered from the
reaction. These results strongly suggest that this ligase-catalyzed peptide
formation proceeds through an activated acyl-phosphate linkage during the
reaction process. ATP therefore assists in the process of the peptide bond
formation by donating its gamma-phosphoryl group to activate the carboxyl group
of UDP-N-acetylmuramic acid.

DOI: 10.1021/bi952078b 
PMID: 8634271  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

