
1. Exp Hematol. 1996 Jun;24(7):795-806.

Identification of CD34+ subsets after glycoprotease selection: engraftment of
CD34+Thy-1+Lin- stem cells in fetal sheep.

Sutherland DR(1), Yeo EL, Stewart AK, Nayar R, DiGiusto R, Zanjani E, Hoffman R, 
Murray LJ.

Author information: 
(1)Oncology Research, The Toronto Hospital, Toronto, Ontario, Canada.

Epitopes on the CD34 molecule detected by some CD34 antibodies can be cleaved by 
a unique glycoprotease from Pasteurella haemolytica, which cleaves only
glycoproteins rich in O-linked glycans. A method to isolate CD34+ cells from
adult bone marrow was developed subsequently, in which CD34+ cells were isolated 
in high purity and yield following immunomagnetic bead selection and detachment
with the glycoprotease. Using a variety of other cell-surface markers shown here 
to be insensitive to glycoprotease, committed progenitors of T lymphoid, B
lymphoid, monomyeloid, megakaryoblastic, or erythroid lineages could be
identified. Significantly, candidate hematopoietic stem cells (HSC) that are
contained within a CD34+Lin- (CD2-, CD14-, CD15-, CD16-, CD19-) (or CD34+CD38-)
subset expressing the Thy-1 antigen (CDw90), c-kit receptor (CD117), and CDw109
but lacking expression of CD71 and HLA-DR antigens also were detected.
Functionally distinct subsets of glycoprotease-selected CD34+ cells were
identified and subfractionated using flow cytometry and fluorescence-activated
cell sorting (FACS). These subsets included candidate HSCs expressing the
CD34+Thy-1+Lin- phenotype, which were sorted from a CD34+ fraction of a mobilized
peripheral blood (MPB) sample. In a fetal sheep model, when CD34+Thy-1+Lin- cells
were injected intraperitoneally, they were capable of homing to the marrow, where
they generated long-term multilineage hematopoiesis and maintained human CD34+
cells, indicating that candidate HSC subsets of CD34+ cells selected with this
highly specific enzyme were capable of engraftment in vivo. The ability to
identify and purify virtually any phenotypically defined subset of
glycoprotease-selected CD34+ stem/progenitor cells should facilitate the study of
hematopoiesis in vitro and in animal models in vivo as well as the development of
novel genetic techniques for the correction of specific blood cell disorders in
humans.


PMID: 8647230  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

