
1. Bone Marrow Transplant. 1996 Jan;17(1):101-9.

Immunologic attributes of cytokine mobilized peripheral blood stem cells and
recovery following transplantation.

Talmadge JE(1), Reed EC, Kessinger A, Kuszynski CA, Perry GA, Gordy CL, Mills KC,
Thomas ML, Pirruccello SJ, Letheby BA, Arneson MA, Jackson JD.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology/Microbiology, University of Nebraska Medical Center,
Omaha 68198-5660, USA.

The immunologic attributes of cytokine mobilized peripheral blood stem cell (PSC)
products (n = 52) and the resulting reconstitution of the hematopoietic and
immunologic system following autologous transplantation were examined in a
consecutive population of non-Hodgkin lymphoma (NHL), or solid tumor patients at 
the University of Nebraska Medical Center. Granulocyte-monocyte colony
stimulating factor (GM-CSF)-mobilized PSC products had a high frequency of
monocytes (31%) and bands (15%) as compared to normal peripheral blood (PB)
cells. The phenotypic analysis of the mobilized PSC product revealed that they
had normal levels of CD4+ cells, an increased frequency of CD8+ cells and a
corresponding decrease in the CD4+:CD8+ cell ratio as compared to the peripheral 
blood leukocytes (PBL) of normal individuals. PSC products also had an increase
in CD34+ cells as compared to PB. Natural killer (NK) and T cell activity in the 
PSC products were also lower than that observed in PB. Post-transplantation there
was an accelerated reconstitution of NK-cell function in the PB as compared to T 
cell function (PHA (phytohemagglutinin) mitogenesis) which did not return to
normal by day 100 post-transplantation. We also report for the first time high
levels of an irradiation resistant suppressor cell activity in the PSC product
and in the PB post-transplantation. There was also a concomitant increase in
CD4-, CD8-, TCR alpha/beta+ cells (phenotypic homolog of 'natural suppressor'
(NS) cells) in the PB post-transplantation. The number of months of prior
chemotherapy correlated with PHA response but the NS activity and frequency of
CD4-, CD8- and TCR alpha/beta+ cells did not. Further, cytokine mobilization and 
apheresis appears to contribute to the loss of PHA responsiveness and the
increased levels of suppressor cell activity.


PMID: 8673041  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

