
1. Mol Immunol. 1996 Apr;33(6):531-40.

Increase in the specific activity of p50csk in proliferating T cells correlates
with decreased specific activity of p56lck and p59fyn and reduced phosphorylation
of CD3 subunits.

Orchansky PL(1), Ng DH, Johnson P, Teh HS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, University of British Columbia,
Vancouver, Canada.

Depending on their prior antigen recognition history, mature T cells respond with
different functional outcomes to T cell receptor (TCR) stimulation. These
functional outcomes include proliferation, anergy and cell death. The biochemical
basis underlying differential responses by mature T cells at different stages of 
their developmental pathway to TCR stimulation remains to be determined. We have 
previously shown that proliferating but not naive T cells were susceptible to
apoptosis after TCR stimulation and that the tyrosine phosphorylation of TCR
zeta, CD3 gamma, and CD3 epsilon in proliferating T cells was decreased after TCR
stimulation. In this study. We determined whether differences in phosphorylation 
between naive and proliferating T cells were due to altered regulation of p56lck 
(Lck) or p59fyn (Fyn) by their positive or negative regulators, CD45 or p5Ocsk
(Csk), respectively. We found that Lck was expressed at the same level and had
the same phosphotyrosine content in naive and proliferating T cells. However, its
autophosphorylation activity was lower in proliferating cells, corresponding to a
2-fold decrease in its specific kinase activity. Similarly, the specific kinase
activity of Fyn was also decreased by about 2-fold in proliferating T cells. In
contrast, although Csk was expressed at the same level in both cell types its
specific kinase activity was increased by 6-fold in proliferating T cells. The
tyrosine phosphatase CD45, a positive regulator of src-family kinases, was
overexpressed by 3- to 6-fold in proliferating cells. However, the specific
activity of CD45 in naive and proliferating T cells was the same. Therefore,
although the protein expression level of CD45 was increased in proliferating T
cells it only partially compensated for the hyperactivity of Csk resulting in a
2-fold reduction in the specific activity of Lck and Fyn in proliferating T
cells.

DOI: 10.1016/0161-5890(96)00006-5 
PMID: 8700169  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

