
1. J Hematother. 1996 Apr;5(2):123-8.

Experience in autologous and allogeneic cord blood banking.

Harris DT(1).

Author information: 
(1)Cord Blood Stem Cell Bank, Department Microbiology and Immunology, College of 
Medicine, University of Arizona, Tucson 85721, USA.

Transplantation and gene therapy offer the hope of treating thousands of
individuals with various malignancies and genetic disorders. However, if this
approach is to become a reality, there must be readily available sources of
suitable HLA-A typed stem cells. Cord blood has been demonstrated to be a
suitable source of hematopoietic stem cells that can be used in place of bone
marrow stem cells for transplant. However, to implement the widespread clinical
use of cord blood, it is necessary to establish both autologous and allogeneic
cord blood banks from which stem cell specimens can be obtained. These cord blood
banks must be large in size, reflect the ethnic diversity of the patient
populations in need, and be financially and logistically feasible. At the Cord
Blood Stem Cell Bank at the University of Arizona, we have addressed many of
these issues and have taken the necessary steps to create both autologous and
allogeneic cord blood banks. We have developed simple, efficient, and
reproducible methods for cord blood collection that can be used by any physician 
without need for previous training. Further, we have developed methodologies to
process the cord blood specimen so that samples can be stored in cryovials. This 
approach to cord blood banking allows for the storage of more than 10,000
independent cord blood specimens in a single liquid nitrogen freezer, reducing
the costs and physical space requirements for such a facility. We also have
developed the use of electronic integration of laboratory worksheets and
controlled rate freezers that permit high laboratory throughput with reduced
problems of reproducibility, data entry, and management errors. In terms of
allogeneic cord blood banking, we have based our bank on several important
assumptions regarding HLA haplotype frequency, ethnic diversity, and the need for
less than perfect HLA matching between donor and recipient. These assumptions
have allowed us to begin to create an allogeneic cord blood bank that can rapidly
attain the size needed for clinical utility without exorbitant costs or time
involved. Results of our efforts in autologous and allogeneic cord blood banking 
are presented (including factors that positively and negatively affect cord blood
collection and banking).

DOI: 10.1089/scd.1.1996.5.123 
PMID: 8723787  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

