
1. Antimicrob Agents Chemother. 1996 Jun;40(6):1432-7.

Antibiotic-impregnated heart valve sewing rings for treatment and prophylaxis of 
bacterial endocarditis.

Cimbollek M(1), Nies B, Wenz R, Kreuter J.

Author information: 
(1)E. Merck, Darmstadt, Germany.

Prosthetic heart valve sewing rings were impregnated with gentamicin crobefat
(EMD 46217), a poorly soluble gentamicin salt, gentamicin sulfate, and
clindamycin palmitate to prevent early prosthetic endocarditis. MICs and MBCs of 
gentamicin and/or clindamycin were tested against several pathogens of early
prosthetic endocarditis. The combination of gentamicin and clindamycin was found 
to be effective against most relevant bacterial pathogens. With an in vitro
pharmacokinetic model, the antibacterial activity of gentamicin and clindamycin
was tested against Staphylococcus aureus and Escherichia coli. High gentamicin
levels over the first 24 h were required for a strong reduction of bacterial
counts of both strains. Equal amounts of gentamicin and clindamycin sustained the
antibacterial effect and prevented regrowth. The most effective release curves of
gentamicin and clindamycin found with an in vitro model were used for monitoring 
release profiles of these antibiotics from impregnated sewing rings by
investigating combinations of gentamicin sulfate, gentamicin crobefat, and
clindamycin palmitate. Sewing rings impregnated with 4 mg of gentamicin sulfate, 
14 mg of gentamicin crobefat, and 20 mg of clindamycin palmitate gave an initial 
gentamicin burst and afterwards yielded a lower sustained release of gentamicin
and clindamycin palmitate. These in vitro release kinetics were confirmed in vivo
by pharmacokinetic analysis after intramuscular implantation of impregnated
sewing ring segments. Gentamicin and active clindamycin palmitate metabolites
were obtained at the implantation site for at least 2 weeks in concentrations of 
3 and 5 micrograms per g of muscle, respectively. The investigated method of
impregnation holds promise for revision implants after prosthetic valve
endocarditis. It may also serve as a prophylactic tool for routine use against
this disease.

DOI: 10.1128/AAC.40.6.1432 
PMCID: PMC163345
PMID: 8726015  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

