
1. Urology. 1996 Aug;48(2):326-34.

Upregulation of prostate-specific membrane antigen after androgen-deprivation
therapy.

Wright GL Jr(1), Grob BM, Haley C, Grossman K, Newhall K, Petrylak D, Troyer J,
Konchuba A, Schellhammer PF, Moriarty R.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, Eastern Virginia Medical School,
Norfolk 23501, USA.

OBJECTIVES: To determine the expression of prostate-specific membrane antigen
(PSMA) before and after androgen-deprivation therapy and to compare PSMA
expression with prostate-specific antigen (PSA) expression.
METHODS: We studied specimens from 20 patients with prostate cancer undergoing
medical or surgical castration or combination androgen-deprivation therapy in
whom matched pretreatment and post-treatment tissue specimens were available and 
16 patients in whom only a post-treatment specimen was available. The expression 
of PSMA and PSA in the tissue specimens was determined by immunoperoxidase
staining. The extent of staining was calculated by multiplying the percent of
antigen-positive tumor cells by the staining intensity to arrive at a stain index
for each biomarker. An in vitro study assessed the concentration of PSMA and PSA 
in extracts of LNCaP cells cultured in the presence or absence of androgen as
determined by immunoassays and Western blot analysis.
RESULTS: PSMA reactivity was found to be increased in 55% (11 of 20) of
post-treatment primary tissues and 100% (4 of 4) of post-treatment metastatic
specimens. In contrast, PSA expression was found to be decreased in 70% (14 of
20) of post-treatment primary and 100% (4 of 4) of post-treatment metastatic
specimens. Neither type of androgen-deprivation treatment nor tissue sensitivity 
to androgen deprivation appeared to influence degree of biomarker expression.
PSMA was found to be downregulated and PSA upregulated when LNCaP cells were
cultured in the presence of testosterone or dihydrotestosterone.
CONCLUSIONS: The enhanced expression of PSMA in tissues and LNCaP cells after
androgen deprivation suggests that PSMA is upregulated in the majority of
prostate carcinomas after androgen treatment. The high expression in metastatic
tissues strongly suggests that PSMA may be a clinically useful target for
antibody-and genetic-directed therapy of prostate cancer that recurs after
androgen deprivation. The mechanism whereby androgens suppress the expression of 
PSMA, and the association of PSMA with the development of hormone-independent
prostate cancers, will require further study.

DOI: 10.1016/s0090-4295(96)00184-7 
PMID: 8753752  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

