
1. Biochemistry. 1996 Aug 27;35(34):11062-9.

Alternative modes of tyrosyl phosphopeptide binding to a Src family SH2 domain:
implications for regulation of tyrosine kinase activity.

Ladbury JE(1), Hensmann M, Panayotou G, Campbell ID.

Author information: 
(1)Oxford Centre for Molecular Sciences, University of Oxford, U.K.

Src homology 2 (SH2) domains interact with proteins containing phosphorylated
tyrosine residues and as such play a key role in mediating tyrosine kinase signal
transduction. Determination of how these interactions maintain specificity is
central to understanding the mechanism of this intracellular signal processing.
In the Src family tyrosine kinases specificity is enhanced by a form of
regulation based on binding of a phosphotyrosine, pY, and its proximal amino acid
sequence from the C-terminus to the SH2 domain of the same protein
(autoregulation) or to a similar protein (homodimeric regulation). Activation of 
the protein is accomplished by removal of this regulatory interaction by
competition from a "specific" interacting ligand. We adopt the SH2 domain from a 
member of the Src family, Fyn (whose predominant physiological role is in
initiation of signals from the T-cell receptor complex), to explore the
differences in structural, thermodynamic, and kinetic determinants of regulatory 
and specific interactions using tyrosyl phosphopeptides based on the C-terminus
and on a putative physiological interacting species from the hamster middle-sized
tumor antigen. The specific peptide interacts with micromolar affinity via
embedding the pY and an isoleucine residue (in the pY + 3 position) in two deep
pockets. This leads to a large favorable enthalpic contribution to free energy.
The regulatory peptide interacts in the pY pocket which forms a pivot for the
rest of the molecule which is dynamic. These structural data for the regulatory
peptide are supported by the observation of a more favorable entropic term and a 
complex mode of binding revealed by kinetic analysis.

DOI: 10.1021/bi960543e 
PMID: 8780508  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

