
1. J Periodontol. 1996 Sep;67(9):871-8.

Gingival fibroblast cytokine profiles in Actinobacillus
actinomycetemcomitans-associated periodontitis.

Dongari-Bagtzoglou AI(1), Ebersole JL.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Periodontics, University of Texas, Health Science Center at San 
Antonio, USA.

Within the in vivo environment human gingival fibroblasts (HGF) may be challenged
with bacteria or bacterial products. This interaction may result in the release
of cytokines which are directly or indirectly involved in connective tissue and
bone catabolism, such as interleukin (IL)-1 beta, IL-6, and IL-8. Our
investigation has tested the hypothesis that HGF from Actinobacillus
actinomycetemcomitans (Aa)-infected patients with rapidly destructive forms of
periodontitis, such as localized juvenile periodontitis (LJP), respond to Aa
challenge with an exaggerated secretion of IL-1 beta, IL-6, and IL-8. We have
compared the in vitro profiles of these cytokines by Aa-challenged HGF obtained
from 2 healthy subjects, 2 Aa-infected, slowly progressing adult periodontitis
(AP) patients and 2 LJP patients. HGF were challenged throughout a 48-hour period
with formalinized whole bacterial cells, and culture supernatants were analyzed
for cytokine content using RIA. No differences were noted in the IL-1 beta
secretion levels among the different HGF cultures. Although basal (unchallenged) 
IL-6 and IL-8 production was similar in all HGF cultures, HGF from the two LJP
patients responded to Aa challenge with a more rapid IL-6 and a more pronounced
IL-8 secretion than healthy or AP HGF. We also tested the ability of human serum 
antibodies against Aa to moderate the Aa-elicited HGF cytokine secretion by
adding human serum, with normal or elevated antibody content. Both sera appeared 
to have an upregulating effect on IL-6 and IL-8 secretion. Depletion of 95% of
the anti-Aa antibody from serum by absorption did not affect its activity. Based 
on the response of HGF from two LJP patients, we propose that Aa-induced
pathology in LJP may be modulated by stimulation of rapid and/or exaggerated
secretion of cytokines with potential catabolic effects, although studies with a 
larger group of LJP patients are needed to further test this hypothesis.
Furthermore, serum antibodies against this microorganism do not appear to have a 
neutralizing effect in cytokine-eliciting HGF-Aa interactions.

DOI: 10.1902/jop.1996.67.9.871 
PMID: 8884644  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

