
1. Eur J Immunol. 1996 Oct;26(10):2299-303.

The outer surface lipoprotein OspA of Borrelia burgdorferi provides
co-stimulatory signals to normal human peripheral CD4+ and CD8+ T lymphocytes.

Knigge H(1), Simon MM, Meuer SC, Kramer MD, Wallich R.

Author information: 
(1)Institute for Immunology, University of Heidelberg, Germany.

Studies in man and mice have indicated that T cells induced during Borrelia
burgdorferi infection are involved in the pathogenesis of the disease. We
analyzed the ability of B. burgdorferi to provide co-stimulatory signals to
highly enriched normal human CD2+ T lymphocytes in the presence of suboptimal
concentrations of immobilized anti-CD3 antibodies. Here we show that the
lipid-containing recombinant outer surface lipoprotein A (rlip-OspA) of B.
burgdorferi but not its delipidated derivative rNS1-OspA augmented CD3-induced T 
cell proliferation in a dose-dependent manner and at levels similar to that
obtained with anti-CD28 antibodies. Lipopolysaccharide had no effect in this
system at any concentration tested, suggesting that the active principle of
co-stimulation is associated with the lipid moiety of rlip-OspA and distinct from
conventional lipid A. Furthermore, incubation of CD2+ T cells or selected CD4+ as
well as CD8+ subpopulations with rlip-OspA, but not with rNS1-OspA led to the
production of interferon (IFN)-gamma, interleukin (IL)-6 and tumor necrosis
factor (TNF)-alpha, but not IL-4. In contrast, co-stimulation of the respective T
cell populations with anti-CD28 antibodies resulted in the generation of
IFN-gamma, IL-4 and TNF-alpha, but not IL-6. This indicated that the signal
transduction pathway induced by rlip-OspA is distinct from that elicited via the 
CD28 receptor. Co-stimulation of T cells with rlip-OspA also resulted in the
development of cytolytic effector cells. In light of the fact that inflamed
tissues of B. burgdorferi-infected hosts contain blood leukocytes together with
spirochetes, their degradation products, or both, these results suggest that
infiltrating CD4+ and CD8+ T cells of any specificities, including spirochetes,
autoantigens, or both, participate in the pathogenesis of Lyme disease.

DOI: 10.1002/eji.1830261005 
PMID: 8898937  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

