
1. Reprod Toxicol. 1996 Mar-Apr;10(2):93-104.

Environmental contaminants in breast milk from the central Asian republics.

Lederman SA(1).

Author information: 
(1)Center for Population and Family Health, Columbia University School of Public 
Health, New York, USA.

Concern has been widespread about possible high levels of environmental
contamination in areas of the former Soviet Union. Some of this concern has
focussed on toxicants in human milk and their potential adverse effects on the
breastfeeding child, but published data have been virtually unavailable. This
study collected previously unpublished analyses of breast milk, water, cow's
milk, and dairy product samples from several of the Republics during the last
decade, providing an opportunity for comparing the level of contamination to
similar data from other countries. The general levels of contamination are
similar to those observed in other countries. Social and economic conditions as
well as the contamination of water and substitute foods in the Republics make
alternative methods of infant feeding demonstrably less desirable for the child
than the measured levels of breast milk contamination.

PIP: Despite widespread concern about high levels of environmental contamination 
in the former Soviet Union, analyses of breast milk, water, cow's milk, and dairy
product samples collected in the past decade from several areas of the Central
Asia Republics revealed contamination levels comparable to those in other
countries. Of particular concern were industrial and agricultural practices,
including the use of pesticides, herbicides, and fertilizers, aimed at increasing
productivity. DDT was present in a large portion of breast milk samples in
Turkmenistan, Tajikistan, and Kazakhstan. The great range of concentrations of
many toxic substances (10- to 20-fold) suggests exposures were from local rather 
than generalized sources. Seasonal variation in the percentage of positive
samples was evident in both breast and cow's milk. Lacking, at present, are
population-based studies of breast feeding practices (incidence, daily frequency,
duration) in Russia that would enable estimates of the magnitude of infant
exposures. For very stable, slowly metabolized, fat-soluble materials such as
polychlorinated biphenyls and DDT, breast feeding may contribute
disproportionately to an infant's exposure to environmental toxins. It cannot be 
assumed, however, that exposure will be decreased if infants are bottle fed.
Breast feeding avoids exposing infants to bacteria-contaminated water and
chemicals in substitute foods. In locales where maternal milk contains
environmental toxicants, water and cow's milk are likely to be similarly
contaminated. A policy to discourage breast feeding would increase fertility,
infant mortality from diarrhea, and household expenditures. Public health
professionals concerned about toxic exposure through breast milk should advocate 
for reduced environmental contamination for people of all ages.
DOI: 10.1016/0890-6238(95)02050-0 
PMID: 8919605  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

