
1. Eur J Immunol. 1996 Nov;26(11):2613-23.

Amino acid substitutions at position 97 in HLA-A2 segregate cytolysis from
cytokine release in MART-1/Melan-A peptide AAGIGILTV-specific cytotoxic T
lymphocytes.

Maeurer MJ(1), Chan HW, Karbach J, Salter RD, Knuth A, Lotze MT, Storkus WJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Microbiology, University of Mainz, Germany.
maeurer@omalley.zdv.uni-mainz.de

CD8+ T lymphocytes recognize antigenic peptides presented by major
histocompatibility complex (MHC) class I molecules. Individual peptide termini
appear to be fixed at the C- and N-terminal ends. In contrast, central peptide
side chains residues may point in different directions and exhibit limited
flexibility, dependent on the MHC class I structural variation. For instance,
position 97 in HLA-A201 has been shown to shift individual peptide species into
different coordinations, one oriented towards the peptide N terminus, or more
towards the C-terminal end. The conformational shape of such non-anchor peptide
residues may affect the affinity of MHC/peptide/TCR interaction, resulting in
quantitative, or qualitative different T cell effector functions. To characterize
the impact of different amino acid residues occupying position 97 in HLA-A2 on
peptide binding and presentation to CTL, we generated a panel of mutated HLA-A2
molecules containing either M, K, T, V, G, Q, W, P or H at position 97. The
HLA-A0201 presented melanoma-associated MART-1/Melan-A derived peptide AAGIGILTV 
was employed to assess the impact of such position-97 mutations on HLA-A2 in
peptide binding measured in an HLA-A2 reconstitution assay and presentation to
AAGIGILTV-specific polyclonal or clonal T lymphocytes as measured by
cytotoxicity, or interferon (IFN)-gamma and granulocyte/ macrophage
colony-stimulating factor (GM-CSF) secretion. The high-affinity AAGIGILTV peptide
bound to all position-97 mutants, albeit with differential efficiencies, and
elicited specific release of IFN-gamma and GM-CSF by CTL. CTL responses were
triggered only by the HLA-A2 wild type, by HLA-A2-H97 (histidine position 97
mutant), and HLA-A2-W97. The HLA-A2-M97 presenting molecule elicited enhanced
cytokine release and CTL effector functions by polyclonal and by clonal effector 
T cells. These results indicate that MHC class I-bound peptides can trigger
specific cytokine release by effector T cells independently of their ability to
induce cytolysis. We conclude that relatively minor changes in the MHC class I
peptide binding groove, including substitutions at position 97, can affect
recognition by antigen-specific T cells. Mutant MHC class I molecules, such as
those described here, may act as partial peptide antagonists and could be useful 
for inducing T lymphocytes with qualitatively different effector functions.

DOI: 10.1002/eji.1830261112 
PMID: 8921947  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

