
1. Oral Dis. 1996 Mar;2(1):87-95.

Diagnostic strategies of periodontitis based on the molecular mechanisms of
periodontal tissue destruction.

Okada H(1), Murakami S, Kitamura M, Nozaki T, Kusumoto Y, Hirano H, Shimauchi H, 
Shimabukuro Y, Saho T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Periodontology, Osaka University Faculty of Dentistry, Japan.

OBJECTIVE: Periodontitis is a disease showing differences in disease progression 
between patients and between sites within a patient. Routine clinical
examinations today are not useful enough to distinguish susceptible patients and 
active lesions from resistant patients and chronic lesions. Diagnostic markers
should be pathogenic and inflammatory factors participating in periodontal tissue
destruction. These are both local and systemic factors.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: First of all, pathogenic factors and proinflammatory
cytokines or mediators in gingival crevicular fluid (GCF) were examined and the
difference was found between active and inactive periodontitis lesions
distinguished by attachment loss. Active lesions were detected by
discriminant-function analysis of these examinations, although the sensitivity of
differential diagnosis was low. Then, we established a novel needle biopsy for
understanding the pathophysiological conditions elicited in active and chronic
inflammatory processes of periodontal tissue destruction. A variety of cytokines 
and mediators were detected in biopsied specimens by reversed transcription
polymerase chain reactions (RT-PCR). Cytokine profiles were varied in inflammed
periodontal biopsies. As IFN gamma mRNA expression was enhanced in inflamed
gingiva, antigen-presenting-cell (APC) functions of human gingival fibroblasts
(HGF) were examined.
RESULTS: Despite the phenotypical resemblance of IFN gamma-treated HGF to
so-called APC, HLA-DR positive HGF could not induce proliferation but suppressed 
proliferation of alloreactive peripheral blood T cells (PBT). However, HLA-DR
positive HGF stimulated the proliferative responses of PBT which had been primed 
with allo-APC. Regulatory immune responses by IFN gamma were different in T cell 
conditions.
CONCLUSIONS: Various kinds of cytokines participated in periodontal inflammation,
and every cytokine is multi-functional. Complex and compound inflammatory
processes can be clarified by examining cytokine networks and the precise effects
of each cytokine on each of the cell types comprising periodontal tissue. It is, 
therefore, necessary for establishing diagnostic strategies to integrate
pathogenic and inflammatory factors in periodontal tissue destruction.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1601-0825.1996.tb00208.x 
PMID: 8957942  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

