
1. Cancer Res. 1996 Dec 15;56(24):5684-91.

Inhibition of angiogenesis in human glioblastomas by chromosome 10 induction of
thrombospondin-1.

Hsu SC(1), Volpert OV, Steck PA, Mikkelsen T, Polverini PJ, Rao S, Chou P, Bouck 
NP.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology-Immunology, R.H. Lurie Cancer Center, Northwestern 
University Medical School, Chicago, Illinois 60611, USA.

Glioblastoma multiforme is distinguished from its less malignant astrocytoma
precursors by intense angiogenesis and frequent loss of tumor suppressor genes on
chromosome 10. Here we link these traits by showing that when a wild-type
chromosome 10 was returned to any of three human glioblastoma cell lines U251,
U87, or LG11, they lost their ability to form tumors in nude mice and switched to
an antiangiogenic phenotype, as measured by the inhibition of capillary
endothelial cell migration and of corneal neovascularization. This change in
angiogenesis was directly due to the increased secretion of a potent inhibitor of
angiogenesis, thrombospondin-1, because: (a) neutralizing thrombospondin
completely relieved the inhibition; (b) the inhibitory activity of thrombospondin
was not dependent on transforming growth factor beta; and (c) chromosome 10
introduction did not alter secreted inducing activity. The inducing activity was 
dependent on vascular endothelial cell growth factor and had an ED50 of 10
microg/ml in media conditioned by parental cells and 9-13 microg/ml in media
conditioned by chromosome 10 revertants. Normal human astrocytes were also
antiangiogenic due to secreted thrombospondin. The effect of chromosome 10 on
thrombospondin production in vitro was reflected in patient material. Normal
brain and lower grade astrocytomas known to retain chromosome 10 stained strongly
for thrombospondin, but 12 of 13 glioblastomas, the majority of which lose
chromosome 10, did not. These data indicate that the loss of tumor suppressors on
chromosome 10 contributes to the aggressive malignancy of glioblastomas in part
by releasing constraints on angiogenesis that are maintained by thrombospondin in
lower grade tumors.


PMID: 8971176  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

