
1. Int Immunol. 1996 Dec;8(12):1971-82.

Decreased production of IL-2 and IFN-gamma by stimulated splenocytes from mice
bearing plasma cell tumors is associated with alteration of DNA-binding factors.

Ruzek MC(1), O'Brien DP, Mathur A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology, University of Minnesota, Minneapolis 55455, USA.

We have previously demonstrated that polyclonally stimulated splenocytes as well 
as enriched T cells from mice bearing plasma cell tumors (PCT) show decreased
production of the Th1-associated cytokines, IL-2 and IFN-gamma. This observed
loss of IL-2 and IFN-gamma production could be attributed to possible alterations
in various factors required for T cell activation and cytokine production. We
find that B7 co-stimulatory molecules and IL-2R are up-regulated normally on
splenocytes from PCT mice. Concanavalin A (Con A) stimulation of splenocytes from
PCT mice in the presence of immobilized anti-CD28 antibody does not enhance
proliferation. Exogenous rIL-2 addition to cultures of splenocytes from PCT mice 
also does not enhance proliferative responses or cytokine production.
Furthermore, we do not observe inhibition of normal splenocyte proliferation and 
IL-2 production in the presence of splenocytes from PCT mice, suggesting that the
appearance of suppressor cells cannot account for the decreased responses by
splenocytes from PCT mice. Also, IL-2 mRNA levels are decreased in stimulated
splenocytes from PCT mice, suggesting that there may be an alteration of
transcription factors required for activation of IL-2. Therefore, we have
evaluated the DNA-binding activity of transcription factors involved in
activation of IL-2 and IFN-gamma gene transcription. We find that binding
activities of AP-1, Oct-1 and Oct-2 transcription factors in stimulated
splenocytes from PCT mice are similar to normal splenocytes. However, the binding
activities of NF-kappa B complexes and factors that bind to the proximal
conserved element in the IFN-gamma promoter are dramatically altered in
splenocytes from PCT mice. These results suggest that PCT induce changes in
certain transcription factors that are important for anti-tumor responses,
including T cell proliferative responses and Th1-associated cytokine production.

DOI: 10.1093/intimm/8.12.1971 
PMID: 8982782  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

