
1. Clin Transplant. 1996 Dec;10(6 Pt 2):579-85.

Repeated HLA mismatches and second renal graft survival in centers of the
South-Eastern Organ Procurement Foundation.

Heise ER(1), Thacker LR, MacQueen JM, Peters TG.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, Bowman Gray School of Medicine,
Wake Forest University, Winston-Salem, North Carolina 27157-1064, USA.

To determine if repeated HLA mismatches and other putative risk factors were
predictive of second graft failure in second grafts performed at Southeastern
Organ Procurement Foundation (SEOPF) members centers, we identified a cohort of
753 retransplants in which one or more HLA antigens were mismatched in primary
grafts. Of this group, 158 (21.1%) received second grafts with repeated
mismatches of one or more HLA-A, B, or DR antigens that were previously
mismatched in the primary graft (RMMs). All regrafts were cadaveric kidneys
transplanted between 1982 and 1995. Multivariate analysis of 19 covariates in 438
regrafts identified four independent factors that were predictive of graft
survival frequency in second transplants. Three of the four factors were
associated with a reduced risk for graft loss in retransplants: cyclosporin A
(CsA) use in graft (p = 0.0001, RR = 0.26), peak PRA < 50% (p = 0.008, RR = 0.52)
and white donor race (p = 0.035, RR = 0.63). One factor was associated with an
increased risk of second graft failure, namely, blood transfusion prior to the
first graft (p = 0.026, RR = 5.14). None of the other 15 factors exerted
significant additional risk to regraft survival frequency in these SEOPF data. In
multivariate analysis, RMMs were not associated with altered graft survival
frequency in regrafts (p = 0.944, RR = 0.99). We than used univariate analyses to
determine whether RMMs had adverse effects on GS in particular subsets of
recipients that were thought to be at increased risk for the second transplant
failure. Univariate analyses were performed with methods that are sensitive to
early events (Wilcoxon) and late events (log-rank). The variables tested were CsA
use for the regraft, duration of primary graft function, panel reactive antibody 
levels (PRA), immunopathologic cause of first graft failure, and HLA mismatch of 
the second graft. These analyses indicated that repeated HLA mismatches were not 
an associated risk factor in any of these subgroups. These SEOPF data indicate
that RMMs are not predictive of increased frequency of graft loss in cadaveric
donor second transplants. We conclude that our results do not support a policy of
routine avoidance of RMMs, which may result in increased waiting time for a
second donor without providing an improved graft survival rate. The available
literature suggests that HLA antibody identification, the use of sensitive flow
cytometric and antiglobulin-augmented cross-match tests, together with
appropriate donor selection, optimal immunosuppression and patient management may
be sufficient to avoid the early loss of second grafts.


PMID: 8996746  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

