
1. J Periodontol. 1996 Dec;67(12):1274-80.

The effect of lipopolysaccharide on growth factor-induced mitogenesis in human
gingival fibroblasts.

Hill SJ(1), Ebersole JL.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Periodontics and Microbiology, University of Texas Health
Science Center at San Antonio, USA.

Quiescent and non-quiescent human gingival fibroblasts (HGF) were incubated for
24 hours with Actinobacillus actinomycetemcomitans lipopolysaccharide (LPS)
and/or growth factors (interleukin-1 beta [IL-1 beta], insulin, epidermal growth 
factor [EGF], platelet-derived growth factor [PDGF], fibroblast growth factor
[FGF], and transforming growth factor-beta [TGF-beta]) to examine the ability of 
LPS to modify HGF proliferation in response to these autocrine and paracrine
growth factors. A. actinomycetemcomitans LPS at high concentrations (> or = 9
micrograms/well) generally resulted in a reduction in DNA synthesis in quiescent 
and non-quiescent fibroblasts; however, LPS at low concentrations (< 9
micrograms/well) showed a minimal enhancement of DNA synthesis (40 to 60%) in
quiescent and non-quiescent cells. HGF co-incubated with mitogenic agents and LPS
(9 micrograms/well) exhibited suppression of growth factor-induced 3H-Tdr uptake 
compared to growth factor-stimulated controls. In contrast, 3H-Tdr uptake was
slightly elevated with addition of LPS at low concentrations (0.09
microgram/well). These trends were seen with all growth factors tested.
Non-quiescent cells, in general, were more responsive to the growth factors and
LPS/growth factor combinations when compared to the quiescent HGF. HGF were
further tested for the ability of LPS to alter growth factor responsiveness by
pretreating the cells with LPS prior to incubation of the growth factor, as well 
as, subsequent addition of LPS to growth factor-pretreated cells. Similar
patterns were observed as above, except IL-1 beta-pretreated quiescent and
non-quiescent HGF followed by LPS addition demonstrated a marked elevation in
proliferation when compared to IL-1 beta stimulated controls. These findings
suggest that LPS may potentially modulate the proliferative rate of connective
tissue undergoing inflammatory or growth factor-induced reparative processes in
periodontal lesions.

DOI: 10.1902/jop.1996.67.12.1274 
PMID: 8997673  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

