
1. Gut. 1996 Dec;39(6):787-94.

Increased production of interleukin 1 beta and hepatocyte growth factor may
contribute to foveolar hyperplasia in enlarged fold gastritis.

Yasunaga Y(1), Shinomura Y, Kanayama S, Higashimoto Y, Yabu M, Miyazaki Y, Kondo 
S, Murayama Y, Nishibayashi H, Kitamura S, Matsuzawa Y.

Author information: 
(1)Second Department of Internal Medicine, Osaka University Medical School,
Japan.

Comment in
    Gut. 1996 Dec;39(6):881-2.

BACKGROUND AND AIMS: It has been reported that eradication of Helicobacter pylori
improves fold width in H pylori associated enlarged fold gastritis. The aim of
this study was to clarify the mechanism of fold thickening in this condition.
PATIENTS AND METHODS: In eight patients with enlarged fold gastritis and 13
patients without enlarged folds, the presence of H pylori infection, inflammatory
infiltrates, mucosal plasia, and epithelial cell proliferation in the body mucosa
were investigated, and production of transforming growth factor alpha (TGF
alpha), hepatocyte growth factor (HGF), and interleukin 1 beta (IL 1 beta) was
determined by a competitive reverse transcription/polymerase chain reaction
method and in vitro short-term culture of biopsy specimens.
RESULTS: In the patients with enlarged fold gastritis, inflammatory infiltrates
including macrophages increased with H pylori colonisation in the body. Foveolar 
thickness and proliferating cell nuclear antigen (PCNA) labelling index were
increased. Messenger RNA levels of HGF, but not TGF alpha, were increased, and
release of HGF and IL 1 beta was increased. HGF release, which was positively
correlated with IL 1 beta release and foveolar thickness, decreased in the
presence of IL 1 receptor antagonist. After eradication of H pylori, inflammatory
infiltrates, IL 1 beta and HGF release decreased with concomitant decreases in
PCNA labelling index, foveolar thickness and fold width.
CONCLUSIONS: Increased IL 1 beta and HGF production caused by H pylori infection 
may contribute to fold thickening of the stomach by stimulating epithelial cell
proliferation and foveolar hyperplasia in patients with enlarged fold gastritis.

DOI: 10.1136/gut.39.6.787 
PMCID: PMC1383448
PMID: 9038658  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

