
1. Mol Cell Biol. 1997 May;17(5):2920-32.

Heterodimerization of Msx and Dlx homeoproteins results in functional antagonism.

Zhang H(1), Hu G, Wang H, Sciavolino P, Iler N, Shen MM, Abate-Shen C.

Author information: 
(1)Graduate Program in Microbiology and Molecular Genetics, UMDNJ-Robert Wood
Johnson Medical School, Center for Advanced Biotechnology and Medicine,
Piscataway, New Jersey 08854, USA.

Protein-protein interactions are known to be essential for specifying the
transcriptional activities of homeoproteins. Here we show that representative
members of the Msx and Dlx homeoprotein families form homo- and heterodimeric
complexes. We demonstrate that dimerization by Msx and Dlx proteins is mediated
through their homeodomains and that the residues required for this interaction
correspond to those necessary for DNA binding. Unlike most other known examples
of homeoprotein interactions, association of Msx and Dlx proteins does not
promote cooperative DNA binding; instead, dimerization and DNA binding are
mutually exclusive activities. In particular, we show that Msx and Dlx proteins
interact independently and noncooperatively with homeodomain DNA binding sites
and that dimerization is specifically blocked by the presence of such DNA sites. 
We further demonstrate that the transcriptional properties of Msx and Dlx
proteins display reciprocal inhibition. Specifically, Msx proteins act as
transcriptional repressors and Dlx proteins act as activators, while in
combination, Msx and Dlx proteins counteract each other's transcriptional
activities. Finally, we show that the expression patterns of representative Msx
and Dlx genes (Msx1, Msx2, Dlx2, and Dlx5) overlap in mouse embryogenesis during 
limb bud and craniofacial development, consistent with the potential for their
protein products to interact in vivo. Based on these observations, we propose
that functional antagonism through heterodimer formation provides a mechanism for
regulating the transcriptional actions of Msx and Dlx homeoproteins in vivo.

DOI: 10.1128/mcb.17.5.2920 
PMCID: PMC232144
PMID: 9111364  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

