
1. Br J Dermatol. 1997 Mar;136(3):319-25.

Differential T-cell reactivity to the round and oval forms of Pityrosporum in the
skin of patients with psoriasis.

Baker BS(1), Powles A, Garioch JJ, Hardman C, Fry L.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Dermatology, St Mary's Hospital, London, U.K.

Pityrosporum yeasts have been implicated as a trigger for the initiation of scalp
lesions in psoriasis. To determine whether Pityrosporum-reactive T cells are
present in lesional psoriatic skin. T-cell lines (TCL) were cultured from the
scalps of nine patients with psoriasis and seven with alopecia areata (disease
controls), and from non-scalp lesions from six of the psoriatic patients. The
psoriatic skin TCL were stained for CD3, CD4, CD8 and TCR alpha beta expression
and tested in a proliferation assay with Candida albicans and purified protein
derivative (PPD), and cytoplasmic and cell-wall extracts of P. ovale (oval) and
P. orbiculare (round). The proliferative responses of corresponding peripheral
blood mononuclear cells (PBMC) were also determined. All the PBMC samples
responded to the Pityrosporum extracts to variable extents, but no significant
difference in the response of the group to the two different forms of yeast was
observed. The response was mediated by CD4+ T cells and inhibited by the addition
of anti-HLA-DR antibody. In addition, all nine psoriatic scalp TCL, which were
predominantly CD3+, CD4+ TCR alpha beta(+), responded to the cytoplasmic, and
five of nine TCL to the cell-wall extract of P. orbiculare. In contrast, only
three of the nine TCL proliferated to either extract of P. ovale. This difference
was significant for both the cytoplasmic (P < 0.01) and cell wall (P = 0.01)
extracts. Similarly, the TCL cultured from non-scalp psoriatic lesions also
showed a more marked response to the P. orbiculare extracts (P = 0.05).
Furthermore, four of seven and two of seven scalp TCL from lesions of alopecia
areata responded to the P. orbiculare and P. ovale extracts, respectively; these 
responses did not differ significantly from those of the psoriatic scalp TCL.
None of the skin TCL responded to either Candida albicans or PPD. These findings 
demonstrate that T cells with differential reactivity to the round and oval forms
of Pityrosporum are present in, but are not specific for, psoriatic skin lesions.
A role for these cells in the pathogenesis of psoriasis remains speculative.


PMID: 9115908  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

