
1. Bone Marrow Transplant. 1997 Jan;19(2):161-72.

Rapid immunologic reconstitution following transplantation with mobilized
peripheral blood stem cells as compared to bone marrow.

Talmadge JE(1), Reed E, Ino K, Kessinger A, Kuszynski C, Heimann D, Varney M,
Jackson J, Vose JM, Bierman PJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology and Microbiology, University of Nebraska Medical
Center, Omaha 68198-5660, USA.

A majority of patients with intermediate or high-grade non-Hodgkin's lymphoma
(NHL) who are treated with high-dose chemotherapy (HDT) and hematopoietic stem
cell transplantation subsequently relapse. Until recently, transplantation was
associated with high morbidity and mortality and the focus was on improving the
safety of this procedure. However, the use of growth factors and other supportive
measures has successfully reduced treatment mortality to less than 5%. Therefore,
new strategies need to be developed to eliminate the growth of any occult tumor
cells reinfused with the stem cell products and the tumor cells remaining in the 
patient. One approach is to improve the immune function of the patients by a more
rapid immune reconstitution and augmentation of effector cell function. We report
studies comparing immune recovery following HDT and autologous peripheral stem
cell transplantation (PSCT) as compared to autologous bone marrow transplantation
(ABMT). These studies examined patients with intermediate and high-grade
non-Hodgkin's lymphoma (NHL) who were treated with HDT and PSCT (n = 56) or ABMT 
(n = 60). The PSCT patients had a significantly faster recovery of circulating
monocytes (CD14+ cells), natural killer ((NK) CD56+) cells, T helper (CD4+)
cells, TCR gamma/delta cells, and naive T lymphocytes (CD45RA+). Following ABMT
there was a significantly more rapid increase in the frequency of T
suppressor/effector (CD8+) cells, B (CD19+) cells, CD34+ cells, polymorphonuclear
leukocytes (PMN) and memory T lymphocytes (CD45RO+). The CD4:CD8 and
CD45RA:CD45RO ratios were consistently higher in the PSCT group as compared to
ABMT suggesting an improved ratio of T helper to T effector/suppressor cells and 
naive T cells. The differences in cellular phenotype translated into improved T
cell function (PHA mitogenesis) and T cell help (pokeweed mitogenesis). In
addition, there as an accelerated reconstitution of NK cell activity following
PSCT as compared to ABMT. The more rapid reconstitution of NK and T cells in
patients rescued with PSCT as compared to ABMT may contribute to an improved
clinical outcome. Further, patients receiving a PSCT may be more responsive to
adjuvant immunotherapy following transplantation.

DOI: 10.1038/sj.bmt.1700626 
PMID: 9116614  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

