
1. J Immunol. 1997 Jun 15;158(12):5797-804.

A naturally processed peptide presented by HLA-A*0201 is expressed at low
abundance and recognized by an alloreactive CD8+ cytotoxic T cell with apparent
high affinity.

Wang W(1), Gulden PH, Pierce RA, Shabanowitz J, Man ST, Hunt DF, Engelhard VH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and the Beirne Carter Center for Immunology
Research, University of Virginia, Charlottesville 22901, USA.

Erratum in
    J Immunol 1999 Mar 1;162(5):3106. Shabanowitz JA [corrected to Shabanowitz J].

In contrast to T cells that respond to peptides presented by self MHC molecules, 
alloreactive T cells recognize determinants expressed on nonself MHC molecules.
Because current positive selection models suggest that T cell affinity toward a
nonself MHC molecule would be lower than that toward a self MHC molecule, we
previously proposed that vigorous alloreactive responses would be generated
preferentially toward those antigenic peptide complexes presented at the highest 
density on the cell surface. The high abundance of two class I MHC-associated
peptides that have been identified as allo- or xenoantigens is consistent with
this hypothesis. We report here the identification of a naturally processed
peptide YLDPAQQNL that is presented by HLA-A*0201 and recognized by an
alloreactive T cell clone. This peptide appears to originate from an unknown
member of the zinc finger proteins. Quantitation by mass spectrometry indicates
that this peptide is present on the surface at 85 to 125 copies per cell,
comparable with the density of several other epitopes presented by HLA-A*0201 to 
self MHC-restricted T cells. In addition, based on the affinity of the peptide
for HLA-A*0201 and the half-maximal peptide concentration required for T cell
sensitization, this alloreactive T cell appears to have an affinity similar to or
higher than that of many self MHC-restricted T cells. These data suggest that
allogeneic responses can be directed against antigenic determinants of low
abundance and that recognition of alloreactive peptides is not limited by a lower
affinity of T cells for nonself MHC molecules.


PMID: 9190931  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

