
1. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 1997 Jun 24;94(13):6892-7.

Selective binding of bacterial toxins to major histocompatibility complex class
II-expressing cells is controlled by invariant chain and HLA-DM.

Lavoie PM(1), Thibodeau J, Cloutier I, Busch R, Sékaly RP.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratoire d'Immunologie, Institut de Recherches Cliniques de Montréal 110
ave Des Pins Ouest, Montreal, PQ H2W 1R7, Canada.

Bacterial superantigens (SAgs) bind to major histocompatibility complex (MHC)
class II molecules and activate T cells in a Vbeta-restricted fashion. We
recently identified subsets of HLA-DR1 molecules that show selectivity for SAgs. 
Here, we extend these observations by showing that different cell lineages
demonstrate distinct SAg-binding specificities although they all express HLA-DR1.
Indeed, B cells bind staphylococcal enterotoxin A (SEA) and toxic shock syndrome 
toxin 1 (TSST-1) with high affinity while staphylococcal enterotoxin B (SEB)
binding is barely detectable. In contrast, DR1-transfected HeLa cells show
efficient binding of SEB, but not of SEA or TSST-1. We investigated the class II 
maturation events required for efficient interaction with SAgs and found that the
ability of cells to bind and present the toxins can be drastically modulated by
coexpression of the class II-associated invariant chain (Ii) and HLA-DM. SEA
binding to DR1 molecules required coexpression of Ii, whereas TSST-1 binding was 
selectively enhanced by DM. Binding of SEB was affected by cell type-specific
factors other than Ii or DM. The selectivity of SAgs for different MHC class II
populations was minimally affected by HLA-DR intrinsic polymorphism and could not
be explained by binding to alternative sites on DR molecules. Our results
indicate that SAgs are sensitive to structural heterogeneity in class II
molecules, which is consequent to the differential regulation of expression of
antigen processing cofactors. Therefore, we speculate that Staphylococcus aureus 
have retained the ability to express numerous SAgs in adaptation to the
micro-heterogeneity displayed by MHC class II molecules and that this may relate 
to their ability to infect different tissues.

DOI: 10.1073/pnas.94.13.6892 
PMCID: PMC21255
PMID: 9192662  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

