
1. Stud Fam Plann. 1997 Jun;28(2):95-103.

Levels and determinants of gynecological morbidity in a district of south India.

Bhatia JC(1), Cleland J, Bhagavan L, Rao NS.

Author information: 
(1)Indian Institute of Management, Bangalore, India.

This article presents the results of an assessment of gynecological morbidity
among 385 women with young children residing in a district of Karnataka State,
South India. All three main modes of assessment (clinical examination, laboratory
tests, and self-reports) reveal a high burden of reproductive tract infections.
The two most common conditions, identified by laboratory tests, were bacterial
vaginosis and mucopurulent cervicitis. Approximately one-fourth of the women had 
clinical evidence of pelvic inflammatory disease, cervical ectopy, and fistula.
The contribution of sexually transmitted diseases to overall gynecological
morbidity appears to be relatively modest; 10 percent were so diagnosed.
Associated conditions of anemia and chronic energy deficiency were common. Severe
anemia was found in 17 percent of cases and severe chronic energy deficiency in
12 percent. These results indicate that radical improvements in women's health in
India will require far more than the diagnosis and treatment of reproductive
tract infections.

PIP: An assessment of gynecological morbidity among 385 married mothers of
children 6-12 months of age from a district in South India's Karnataka State
revealed a high burden of reproductive tract infections. Research methods
included clinical examination, laboratory tests, and self-reports. A total of 152
women reported 226 gynecological complaints to a social worker, primarily vaginal
discharge with bad odor and itching or irritation (22%), lower abdominal pain or 
vaginal discharge with fever (16%), and menstrual bleeding disorders or pain
(15%). Under more extensive probing by a gynecologist, the proportion of women
reporting menstrual problems rose to 62%. At medical examination, 36% of women
had at least one clinically diagnosed reproductive tract infection, including
pelvic inflammatory disease (11%), cervical ectopy (10%), and genital prolapse
(3%). More than half had endogenous infections. The two most common infections,
identified by laboratory tests, were bacterial vaginosis (18%) and mucopurulent
cervicitis (37%). Sexually transmitted diseases, primarily trichomonal vaginalis,
were diagnosed in 10%. Women residing in town, those with 6 or more years of
schooling, and women with 4 or more pregnancies were significantly more likely to
report menstrual problems. Laboratory-detected vaginosis was significantly higher
among urban and sterilized women. There were no significant associations between 
demographic/socioeconomic status variables and the other reproductive health
problems analyzed. Finally, severe anemia was present in 17% and chronic energy
deficiency in 12%. The combination of widespread undernutrition/malnutrition and 
reproductive tract infections revealed in this study indicates an urgent need to 
take steps to implement the reproductive health strategy outlined at the 1994
Cairo Conference in South India.

PMID: 9216030  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

