
1. Blood. 1997 Jul 15;90(2):736-44.

Ig D(H) gene segment transcription and rearrangement before surface expression of
the pan-B-cell marker CD19 in normal human bone marrow.

Bertrand FE 3rd(1), Billips LG, Burrows PD, Gartland GL, Kubagawa H, Schroeder HW
Jr.

Author information: 
(1)Comprehensive Cancer Center, Department of Microbiology, University of Alabama
at Birmingham, USA.

The onset of IgH transcription and rearrangement is a defining characteristic of 
the progenitor population in which B-lineage commitment occurs. These features
were used to better define the earliest stage of B-cell commitment in humans and 
to determine if these stages differ as a function of human ontogeny. Fetal and
adult bone marrow mononuclear cells were sorted into B-lineage subpopulations on 
the basis of surface expression of the stem cell marker CD34, the pan-B-cell
marker CD19, and IgM and analyzed for transcription and rearrangement of the IgH 
locus. The locus was found to be transcriptionally active before surface
expression of CD19, as indicated by the presence of germline I mu, C mu, and
D(H)Q52 transcripts in the CD34+ CD19- subpopulation. Transcripts from IgH
alleles that had undergone DJC mu rearrangements were also detected in the CD34+ 
CD19- subpopulation. Within this subpopulation, low levels of DXP-containing DJC 
mu transcripts were detected in both fetal and adult cells. Although D(H)Q52 DJC 
mu transcripts were abundant in fetal CD34+ CD19- cells, they were not detected
in cells of the same phenotype derived from adult bone marrow. In both fetus and 
adult, V(H)3-and V(H)6-containing VDJC mu transcripts were detected only in the
CD19+ subpopulations. These data indicate that transcription of D(H)Q52-J(H) and 
DXP-J(H) rearrangements differs during fetal and adult B lymphopoiesis. Moreover,
in both fetus and adult, transcription of unrearranged components of the IgH
locus and DJ rearrangements can proceed before the surface expression of CD19.


PMID: 9226174  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

