
1. Microvasc Res. 1997 Jul;54(1):13-26.

Lumen formation and other angiogenic activities of cultured capillary endothelial
cells are inhibited by thrombospondin-1.

Tolsma SS(1), Stack MS, Bouck N.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology-Immunology, Northwestern University Medical School,
Chicago, Illinois, 60611, USA.

The large secreted glycoprotein thrombospondin-1 is a potent inhibitor of
neovascularization in vivo. In order to better understand its mechanism of
action, we have determined the full range of deficits thrombospondin can impose
on cultured capillary endothelial cells. Exogenously added thrombospondin-1
blocked the ability of these cells to organize into cords. It blocked the
migration of endothelial cells and vascular smooth muscle cells, but not that of 
fibroblasts, neutrophils, or keratinocytes, demonstrating specificity.
Conversely, when the endogenous thrombospondin-1 produced by the endothelial
cells was inactivated using antibodies that can neutralize its inhibition of
neovascularization in vivo, migration toward basic fibroblast growth factor and
cord formation were stimulated, and sparsely plated cells developed cylindrical
cavities. These cavities formed by vesicle fusion, extended the depth of the
cell, and appeared to be incipient lumens, staining positively for the luminal
marker angiotensin converting enzyme. Antiangiogenic levels of thrombospondin-1
had no measurable effect on the overall level of activity of soluble gelatinases 
or on urokinase plasminogen activator produced by activated endothelial cells.
Coupled with previously published data, these results demonstrate
thrombospondin-1 is a multifaceted inhibitor able to block the entire program of 
dedifferentiation and redifferentiation essential to the formation of new
vessels. They also support the contention that the endogenously produced protein 
contributes to the quiescence of the normal vasculature.

DOI: 10.1006/mvre.1997.2015 
PMID: 9245640  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

