
1. Microb Pathog. 1997 Jul;23(1):1-10.

Neutralization of hemolytic and mouse lethal activities of C. perfringens
alpha-toxin need simultaneous blockade of two epitopes by monoclonal antibodies.

Schoepe H(1), Wieler LH, Bauerfeind R, Schlapp T, Potschka H, Hehnen HR, Baljer
G.

Author information: 
(1)Institut für Hygiene und Infektionskrankheiten der Tiere,
Justus-Liebig-Universität, Giessen, Germany.

Three murine monoclonal antibodies (MAbs 3B4, 1E8, 1F9) were produced by fusion
of X63-Ag8.653 myeloma cells and splenocytes of mice immunized with
glutaraldehyde-inactivated alpha-toxin of Clostridium perfringens. All MAbs
belonged to the immunoglobulin G (IgG) class and possessed a kappa light chain.
All the MAbs were specific for alpha-toxin of C. perfringens as demonstrated by
immunoblotting experiments performed with culture supernatants of C. perfringens,
C. bifermentans, C. sordellii, and Bacillus cereus. Competition analysis in an
ELISA revealed that the MAbs recognized different epitopes on the alpha-toxin
molecule. In an immunoblot assay based on a recombinant protein expressed in
Escherichia coli, the binding site of MAb 1E8 but not those of MAbs 3B4 and 1 F9 
were mapped to the COOH-terminal fragment of alpha-toxin (aa 248-370). To prove
the neutralizing potential of the MAbs, alpha-toxin was preincubated with MAbs
and subsequently tested for its lecithinase activity in an egg yolk diffusion
turbidity (EYDT) assay, its hemolytic activity in a hemolysis test, and its
lethal effect on mice after intraperitoneally administration. When the MAbs were 
tested individually, neutralization was only seen in the EYDT assay, where MAb
3B4 completely abolished the lecithinase activity of alpha toxin. However, when
MAbs 3B4 and 1 E8 were used in combination, they acted synergistically and
inhibited the lysis of rabbit erythrocytes in vitro. The same mixture of MAbs was
also able to completely neutralize the lethal effect of three LD50 of alpha-toxin
on Balb/c mice. Our results suggest that the alpha-toxin molecule contains
several domains which are differently involved in the various activities of the
toxin. We conclude that the hemolytic domain(s) of alpha-toxin is (are) identical
with or very closely located to the domain(s) that cause the mouse lethal effect.
The lecithinase activity may be involved in the mechanisms of hemolysis and mouse
lethality but appears not to be the only determinant.

DOI: 10.1006/mpat.1996.0123 
PMID: 9250775  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

