
1. J Cell Biol. 1997 Aug 25;138(4):759-69.

Acid-induced dissociation of VacA, the Helicobacter pylori vacuolating cytotoxin,
reveals its pattern of assembly.

Cover TL(1), Hanson PI, Heuser JE.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, Vanderbilt University School of Medicine, Department
of Veterans Affairs Medical Center, Nashville, Tennessee 37232-2605, USA.

In this study, we describe the ultrastructural changes associated with acid
activation of Helicobacter pylori vacuolating cytotoxin (VacA). Purified VacA
molecules imaged by deep-etch electron microscopy form approximately 30-nm
hexagonal "flowers," each composed of an approximately 15-nm central ring
surrounded by six approximately 6-nm globular "petals." Upon exposure to acidic
pH, these oligomeric flowers dissociate into collections of up to 12
teardrop-shaped subunits, each measuring approximately 6 x 14 nm.
Correspondingly, glycerol density gradient centrifugation shows that at neutral
pH VacA sediments at approximately 22 S, whereas at acidic pH it dissociates and 
sediments at approximately 5 S. Immunoblot and EM analysis of the 5-S material
demonstrates that it represents approximately 90-kD monomers with 6 x 14-nm
"teardrop" morphology. These data indicate that the intact VacA oligomer consists
of 12 approximately 90-kD subunits assembled into two interlocked six-membered
arrays, overlap of which gives rise to the flower-like appearance. Support for
this interpretation comes from EM identification of small numbers of relatively
"flat" oligomers composed of six teardrop-shaped subunits, interpreted to be
halves of the complete flower. These flat forms adsorb to mica in two different
orientations, corresponding to hexameric surfaces that are either exposed or
sandwiched inside the dodecamer, respectively. This view of VacA structure
differs from a previous model in which the flowers were interpreted to be single 
layers of six monomers and the flat forms were thought to be proteolysed flowers.
Since acidification has been shown to potentiate the cytotoxic effects of VacA,
the present results suggest that physical disassembly of the VacA oligomer is an 
important feature of its activation.

DOI: 10.1083/jcb.138.4.759 
PMCID: PMC2138037
PMID: 9265644  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

