
1. S Afr Med J. 1997 Aug;87(8 Suppl):1052-4.

Bacterial meningitis in children at Kalafong Hospital, 1990-1995.

Grobler AC(1), Hay IT.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Paediatrics, Kalafong Hospital.

OBJECTIVES: To determine the bacteriological profile, morbidity, mortality and
factors which contributed to the outcome.
DESIGN: Retrospective descriptive.
SETTING: Kalafong Hospital, Pretoria.
SUBJECTS: Children older than 1 month and younger than 13 years admitted between 
January 1990 and December 1995 with culture-proven bacterial meningitis.
MAIN OUTCOME MEASURES: Causative bacteria, antibiotic sensitivity, age, clinical 
features and short-term morbidity and mortality.
RESULTS: Sixty-one patients had culture-proven bacterial meningitis. In 57%
Haemophilus influenzae, in 33% Streptococcus pneumoniae and in 1.6% (1 patient)
Neisseria meningitidis were cultured (5 patients yielded other organisms). Some
H. influenzae cultures showed resistance to cefotaxime and ampicillin and some S.
pneumoniae cultures to penicillin. The mean age of all patients was 18 months.
Twenty-three per cent of the patients had consulted between 1 and 5 health
workers and were then self-referred. Fever, cough and vomiting were the most
common complaints. On examination, fever and pneumonia were the most common
findings apart from neurological system involvement. Twelve patients (20%) died
and 46% were discharged with obvious neurological complications. Morbidity and
mortality were the highest for S. pneumoniae meningitis. Bad prognostic features 
were delayed referral, S. pneumoniae meningitis, convulsions and abnormal
neurological signs on admission.
CONCLUSION: H. influenzae was the most common cause of childhood bacterial
meningitis at Kalafong Hospital, with N. meningitidis meningitis being very rare.
Morbidity and mortality were very high, compared with outcome in developed
countries. Delayed referral seems to be an important factor in predicting an
adverse outcome.


PMID: 9323430  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

