
1. Mol Cell Biol. 1997 Nov;17(11):6321-9.

Synergistic activation of the fibroblast growth factor 4 enhancer by Sox2 and
Oct-3 depends on protein-protein interactions facilitated by a specific spatial
arrangement of factor binding sites.

Ambrosetti DC(1), Basilico C, Dailey L.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Kaplan Cancer Center, New York University
School of Medicine, New York 10016, USA.

Octamer binding and Sox factors are thought to play important roles in
development by potentiating the transcriptional activation of specific gene
subsets. The proteins within these factor families are related by the presence of
highly conserved DNA binding domains, the octamer binding protein POU domain or
the Sox factors HMG domain. We have previously shown that fibroblast growth
factor 4 (FGF-4) gene expression in embryonal carcinoma cells requires a
synergistic interaction between Oct-3 and Sox2 on the FGF-4 enhancer. Sox2 and
Oct-3 bind to adjacent sites within this enhancer to form a ternary protein-DNA
complex (Oct-3*) whose assembly correlates with enhancer activity. We now
demonstrate that increasing the distance between the octamer and Sox binding
sites by base pair insertion results in a loss of enhancer function.
Significantly, those enhancer "spacing mutants" which failed to activate
transcription were also compromised in their ability to form the Oct* complexes
even though they could still bind both Sox2 and the octamer binding proteins,
suggesting that a direct interaction between Sox2 and Oct-3 is necessary for
enhancer function. Consistent with this hypothesis, Oct-3 and Sox2 can
participate in a direct protein-protein interaction in vitro in the absence of
DNA, and both this interaction and assembly of the ternary Oct* complexes require
only the octamer protein POU and Sox2 HMG domains. Assembly of the ternary
complex by these two protein domains occurs in a cooperative manner on FGF-4
enhancer DNA, and the loss of this cooperative interaction contributes to the
defect in Oct-3* formation observed for the enhancer spacing mutants. These
observations indicate that Oct-3* assembly results from protein-protein
interactions between the domains of Sox2 and Oct-3 that mediate their binding to 
DNA, but it also requires a specific arrangement of the binding sites within the 
FGF-4 enhancer DNA. Thus, these results define one parameter that is fundamental 
to synergistic activation by Sox2 and Oct-3 and further emphasize the critical
role of enhancer DNA sequences in the proper assembly of functional activation
complexes.

DOI: 10.1128/mcb.17.11.6321 
PMCID: PMC232483
PMID: 9343393  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

