
1. Tissue Antigens. 1997 Oct;50(4):366-71.

Analysis of HLA-A and -B serologic typing of bone marrow registry donors using
polymerase chain reaction with sequence-specific oligonucleotide probes and DNA
sequencing.

Sintasath DM(1), Bei M, Steiner N, Ng J, Alosco S, Hegland JD, Hurley CK.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, Georgetown University Medical
Center, Washington, District of Columbia 20007, USA.

Unrelated volunteer donors (69) recruited by the National Marrow Donor Program
were HLA typed by DNA-based methods for both the HLA-A and -B loci. Each donor
had been previously typed by serology by at least two independent laboratories.
Of the 69 samples, all serologic laboratories were in concordance for HLA-A in 62
typed samples and for HLA-B in 48 typed samples. Of the serologically concordant 
samples, 5 samples typed for HLA-A and 7 samples typed for HLA-B received DNA and
serology types differing in their level of resolution. One sample typed for HLA-A
and 3 samples typed for HLA-B by DNA methods gave different results from their
serologic assignments. Of the samples exhibiting disparities among the different 
serologic typing laboratories, the DNA-defined types of 7 samples typed for HLA-A
and 18 samples typed for HLA-B were consistent with at least one of the serologic
assignments. The DNA types for the remaining 3 HLA-B typed samples did not agree 
with the serologic assignments and their alleles were subsequently sequenced. One
of these sequences was a previously undefined allele, B*1537. Sharing of
polymorphic sequences among HLA allelic products creates difficulties for
consistent serologic assignments of some types complicating the process of
identifying potential donors from bone marrow registries. Thus, the use of
DNA-based typing techniques for characterization of donor class I types should
allow a more consistent definition of types and should speed the donor selection 
process.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1399-0039.1997.tb02889.x 
PMID: 9349621  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

