
1. Blood. 1998 Jan 1;91(1):100-10.

In vitro behavior of hematopoietic progenitor cells under the influence of
chemoattractants: stromal cell-derived factor-1, steel factor, and the bone
marrow environment.

Kim CH(1), Broxmeyer HE.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology/Immunology, Indiana University School of Medicine, 
Indianapolis, Indiana 46202-5121, USA.

How multiple chemoattractants cooperate in directing the migration of
hematopoietic progenitor cells (HPC) for homing and peripheral blood mobilization
has not yet been established. We report here the behavior of HPC under the
influence of two different chemoattractants, stromal cell-derived factor (SDF)-1 
and steel factor (SLF), and the chemotactic nature of the bone marrow (BM)
environment using a two-chamber in vitro migration system. Various formulae were 
adopted to quantitate these effects. Based on these quantitations, SDF-1 showed
only chemotactic activity, while SLF showed both chemotactic and chemokinetic
activities on factor-dependent MO7e cells. SLF, like SDF-1, attracted human HPC
from a population of CD34+ cells and induced actin polymerization in MO7e cells. 
SLF and SDF-1 cooperated in attracting MO7e cells, as well as cord blood (CB) and
BM CD34+ cells. A negative concentration gradient of SLF and SDF-1, formed by the
presence of chemoattractants in the upper chamber, showed potent inhibitory
effects on MO7e cell migration induced by either of these chemoattractants in the
lower chamber, and SDF-1 and SLF were synergistic in mobilizing cells to the
lower chamber from this negative chemoattractant gradient. Plasma obtained from
BM aspirates, but not CB or peripheral blood, showed strong chemotactic effects
on BM and CB CD34+ cells, and an inhibitory effect in a negative gradient on
SDF-1-dependent CD34+ cell migration. These in vitro migration experiments
suggest that chemoattractants such as SDF-1 and SLF with other unidentified BM
chemoattractants may be involved cooperatively in the migration of HPC to the BM 
and in preventing spontaneous mobilization of HPC out of the BM.


PMID: 9414273  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

