
1. J Exp Med. 1998 Jan 5;187(1):37-48.

The class I antigen-processing pathway for the membrane protein tyrosinase
involves translation in the endoplasmic reticulum and processing in the cytosol.

Mosse CA(1), Meadows L, Luckey CJ, Kittlesen DJ, Huczko EL, Slingluff CL,
Shabanowitz J, Hunt DF, Engelhard VH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and the Beirne Carter Center for Immunology
Research, University of Virginia, Charlottesville, Virginia 22904, USA.

Formation of major histocompatibility complex class I-associated peptides from
membrane proteins has not been thoroughly investigated. We examined the
processing of an HLA-A*0201-associated epitope, YMDGTMSQV, that is derived from
the membrane protein tyrosinase by posttranslational conversion of the sequence
YMNGTMSQV. Only YMDGTMSQV and not YMNGTMSQV was presented by HLA-A*0201 on cells 
expressing full-length tyrosinase, although both peptides have similar affinities
for HLA-A*0201 and are transported by TAP. In contrast, translation of YMNGTMSQV 
in the cytosol, as a minigene or a larger fragment of tyrosinase, led to the
presentation of the unconverted YMNGTMSQV. This was not due to overexpression
leading to saturation of the processing/conversion machinery, since presentation 
of the converted peptide, YMDGTMSQV, was low or undetectable. Thus, presentation 
of unconverted peptide was associated with translation in the cytosol, suggesting
that processing of the full-length tyrosinase occurs after translation in the
endoplasmic reticulum. Nevertheless, presentation of YMDGTMSQV in cells
expressing full-length tyrosinase was TAP (transporter associated with antigen
processing) and proteasome dependent. After inhibition of proteasome activity,
tyrosinase species could be detected in the cytosol. We propose that processing
of tyrosinase involves translation in the endoplasmic reticulum, export of
full-length tyrosinase to the cytosol, and retransport of converted peptides by
TAP for association with HLA-A*0201.

DOI: 10.1084/jem.187.1.37 
PMCID: PMC2199193
PMID: 9419209  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

