
1. Yeast. 1997 Dec;13(15):1449-63.

Deviant Pex3p levels affect normal peroxisome formation in Hansenula polymorpha: 
a sharp increase of the protein level induces the proliferation of numerous,
small protein-import competent peroxisomes.

Baerends RJ(1), Salomons FA, Kiel JA, van der Klei IJ, Veenhuis M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology, Groningen Biomolecular Sciences and Biotechnology 
Institute, University of Groningen, The Netherlands.

Pex3p has been implicated in the biosynthesis of the peroxisomal membrane of the 
yeast Hansenula polymorpha. Here we show that in the initial stages of a sharp
increase in Pex3p levels, induced in batch cultures of cells of a constructed H. 
polymorpha strain, which contained seven copies of PEX3 under control of the
alcohol oxidase promoter (WT::PAOX.PEX3(7x)), strongly interfered with normal
peroxisome proliferation. Ultrastructural studies demonstrated that in such cells
numerous small peroxisomes had developed, which were absent in wild-type
controls. These organelles, which contained typical peroxisomal matrix and
membrane proteins (alcohol oxidase, catalase, Pex3p, Pex10p and Pex14p), showed a
relatively low density (1.18 g cm-3) after sucrose gradient centrifugation of
WT::PAOX.PEX3(7x) homogenates, compared to normal peroxisomes (1.23 g cm-3). We
furthermore demonstrated that these early induced, small peroxisomes were
protected against glucose-induced proteolytic degradation and did not fuse to
form larger organelles. Remarkably, the induction of these small peroxisomes was 
paralleled by a partial defect in matrix protein import, reflected by the
mislocalization of minor amounts of alcohol oxidase protein in the cytosol.
However, when the cells were subsequently placed under conditions in which the
synthesis of a new matrix enzyme (amine oxidase) was induced while simultaneously
the excessive proliferation was repressed (by repression of the PAOX), amine
oxidase protein was selectively incorporated into these organelles. This
indicated that the small peroxisomes had regained a normal protein import
capacity. Based on these results we argue that peroxisome proliferation and
matrix protein import are coupled processes in H. polymorpha.

DOI: 10.1002/(SICI)1097-0061(199712)13:15<1449::AID-YEA191>3.0.CO;2-Q 
PMID: 9434350  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

