
1. Infect Immun. 1998 Feb;66(2):696-702.

Filamentous actin disruption and diminished inositol phosphate response in
gingival fibroblasts caused by Treponema denticola.

Yang PF(1), Song M, Grove DA, Ellen RP.

Author information: 
(1)Faculty of Dentistry, University of Toronto, Ontario, Canada.

Previous reports have shown that Treponema denticola causes rearrangement of
filamentous actin (F-actin) in human gingival fibroblasts (HGF). The purpose of
this investigation was to determine the effect of T. denticola on the generation 
of inositol phosphates (IPs) in relation to a time course for F-actin disruption 
in HGF. Cultured HGF were exposed to washed cells of T. denticola ATCC 35405 for 
140 min. Changes in the fluorescence intensity of rhodamine-phalloidin-labeled
F-actin in serial optical sections of single HGF were quantified by confocal
microscopy image analysis. The percentage of cells with stress fiber disruption
was also determined by fluorescence microscopy. Challenge with T. denticola
caused a significant reduction in F-actin within the first hour, especially at
the expense of F-actin in the ventral third of the cells, and a significant
increase in the percentage of HGF with altered stress fiber patterns. Significant
concentration-dependent disruption of stress fibers was also caused by HGF
exposure to a Triton X-100 extract of T. denticola outer membrane (OM). IPs were 
measured by a radiotracer assay based on the incorporation of myo-[3H]inositol
into IPs in HGF incubated with LiCl to inhibit endogenous phosphatases. HGF
challenge with several strains of T. denticola and the OM extract of T. denticola
ATCC 35405 resulted in a diminished accumulation of radiolabeled IPs relative to 
both 15 and 1% fetal bovine serum, which served as strongly positive and
background control agonists, respectively. The significantly diminished IP
response to T. denticola ATCC 35405 occurred within 60 min, concomitant with
significant reduction of total F-actin and disruption of stress fibers.
Pretreatment with the proteinase inhibitor phenylmethylsulfonyl fluoride, which
had previously been found to block T. denticola's degradation of endogenous
fibronectin and detachment of HGF from the extracellular matrix, had little
effect on F-actin stress fiber disruption and the IP response. Therefore, in
addition to its major surface chymotrypsin-like properties, T. denticola
expresses cytopathogenic activities that diminish the generation of IPs during
the time course associated with significant cytoskeletal disruption in
fibroblasts.

DOI: 10.1128/IAI.66.2.696-702.1998 
PMCID: PMC107959
PMID: 9453629  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

