
1. Eur J Immunol. 1998 Jan;28(1):153-63.

Compartmentalization of T cell responses following respiratory infection with
Bordetella pertussis: hyporesponsiveness of lung T cells is associated with
modulated expression of the co-stimulatory molecule CD28.

McGuirk P(1), Mahon BP, Griffin F, Mills KH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biology, National University of Ireland, Maynooth, Co. Kildare.

We have used a murine respiratory challenge model to examine the local T cell
responses in the lung during infection with Bordetella pertussis. T cells from
lung parenchyma and airways of naive and infected mice were refractory to both
antigen and mitogen stimulation in the presence of lung macrophages. Furthermore 
irradiated mononuclear cells from the lungs suppressed antigen and
mitogen-induced proliferation, but not IFN-gamma production, by splenic T cells. 
Removal of macrophages and stimulation of purified lung T cells in the presence
of irradiated splenic antigen-presenting cells fully restored the response to
mitogen. However, T cells purified from the lung during the acute phase of
infection with B. pertussis failed to proliferate or produce detectable levels of
IL-2, IL-4, IL-5 or IFN-gamma in response to purified bacterial antigens. In
contrast, splenic T cells from these animals produced high levels of IL-2 and
IFN-gamma and proliferated strongly to a range of bacterial components.
Phenotypic analysis of bronchoalveolar lavage cells during the course of
infection revealed transient infiltration of neutrophils, followed by
macrophages, CD4+ T cells and smaller numbers of CD8+ T cells and gammadelta+ T
cells. Cell surface expression of B7 on infiltrating macrophages and CTLA-4 on T 
cells did not change significantly during infection. However, expression of the
CD28 co-stimulatory molecule was profoundly reduced on lung T cells during the
acute phase of infection. In contrast, lung T cells from mice primed by B.
pertussis infection or vaccination were resistant to CD28 down-regulation. These 
results suggest compartmentalization of T cell responses between the lung and the
periphery during B. pertussis infection and that B. pertussis may have
immunomodulatory properties on local T cell populations in the lungs of naive
mice.

DOI: 10.1002/(SICI)1521-4141(199801)28:01<153::AID-IMMU153>3.0.CO;2-# 
PMID: 9485195  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

