
1. Biochemistry. 1998 Feb 24;37(8):2529-37.

The folding kinetics and thermodynamics of the Fyn-SH3 domain.

Plaxco KW(1), Guijarro JI, Morton CJ, Pitkeathly M, Campbell ID, Dobson CM.

Author information: 
(1)Oxford Centre for Molecular Sciences, New Chemistry Laboratory, and Department
of Biochemistry, University of Oxford, South Parks Road, Oxford OX1 3QT, England.

The equilibrium unfolding and the kinetic folding and unfolding of the 67 residue
Fyn-SH3 domain have been investigated. Equilibrium unfolding experiments indicate
that, despite the lack of both disulfide bonds and prosthetic groups, Fyn-SH3 is 
relatively stable with a free energy of folding of -6.0 +/- 0.6 kcal mol-1 at 20 
degrees C. Kinetic experiments indicate that the domain refolds in a rapid
two-state manner without significant population of intermediates (k = 94.3 s-1 in
H2O at 20 degrees C). Despite the presence of two proline residues, the refolding
of the domain is monophasic, and no significant proline isomerization-like
refolding phase is observed. This can be attributed to an extremely low level of 
the incorrect (cis) isomer of the structurally important Pro134 residue in the
protein denatured in 8 M guanidine hydrochloride. Analysis of the temperature and
guanidine hydrochloride dependence of the folding rate suggests that the folding 
transition state of this protein is relatively well organized. A comparison with 
the refolding kinetics and thermodynamics of other homologous SH3 domains
indicates that these exhibit an equivalent degree of transition state
organization. This potentially arises from conservation of key features of the
transition state conformation despite sometimes relatively low overall sequence
identity. Such a comparison further suggests that relative thermodynamic
stability is an important factor in determining the relative folding rates of
natural proteins with a common fold, but that specific details of the amino acid 
sequence can also play a significant role in individual cases.

DOI: 10.1021/bi972075u 
PMID: 9485402  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

