
1. J Cell Biol. 1998 Mar 9;140(5):1023-37.

A dominant-negative clathrin mutant differentially affects trafficking of
molecules with distinct sorting motifs in the class II major histocompatibility
complex (MHC) pathway.

Liu SH(1), Marks MS, Brodsky FM.

Author information: 
(1)The G.W. Hooper Foundation, Department of Microbiology and Immunology,
University of California, San Francisco, California 94143-0552, USA.

The role of clathrin in intracellular sorting was investigated by expression of a
dominant-negative mutant form of clathrin, termed the hub fragment. Hub
inhibition of clathrin-mediated membrane transport was established by
demonstrating a block of transferrin internalization and an alteration in the
intracellular distribution of the cation-independent mannose-6-phosphate
receptor. Hubs had no effect on uptake of FITC-dextran, adaptor distribution,
organelle integrity in the secretory pathway, or cell surface expression of
constitutively secreted molecules. Hub expression blocked lysosomal delivery of
chimeric molecules containing either the tyrosine-based sorting signal of H2M or 
the dileucine-based sorting signal of CD3gamma, confirming a role for
clathrin-coated vesicles (CCVs) in recognizing these signals and sorting them to 
the endocytic pathway. Hub expression was then used to probe the role of CCVs in 
targeting native molecules bearing these sorting signals in the context of HLA-DM
and the invariant chain (I chain) complexed to HLA-DR. The distribution of these 
molecules was differentially affected. Accumulation of hubs before expression of 
the DM dimer blocked DM export from the TGN, whereas hubs had no effect on direct
targeting of the DR-I chain complex from the TGN to the endocytic pathway.
However, concurrent expression of hubs, such that hubs were building to
inhibitory concentrations during DM or DR-I chain expression, caused cell surface
accumulation of both complexes. These observations suggest that both DM and DR-I 
chain are directly transported to the endocytic pathway from the TGN, DM in CCVs,
and DR-I chain independent of CCVs. Subsequently, both complexes can appear at
the cell surface from where they are both internalized by CCVs. Differential
packaging in CCVs in the TGN, mediated by tyrosine- and dileucine-based sorting
signals, could be a mechanism for functional segregation of DM from DR-I chain
until their intended rendezvous in late endocytic compartments.

DOI: 10.1083/jcb.140.5.1023 
PMCID: PMC2132696
PMID: 9490717  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

