
1. J Immunol. 1998 Mar 1;160(5):2072-9.

Activation of human T cells with superantigen (staphylococcal enterotoxin B) and 
CD28 confers resistance to apoptosis via CD95.

McLeod JD(1), Walker LS, Patel YI, Boulougouris G, Sansom DM.

Author information: 
(1)Bath Institute for Rheumatic Diseases, Department of Pharmacy and
Pharmacology, University of Bath, United Kingdom.

Ag recognition is an essential component for an effective T cell response.
However, T cell activation is also subject to additional regulation by accessory 
molecules. CD28 provides essential costimulatory signals that allow T cells to
proliferate, whereas molecules such as CTLA-4 and CD95 (Fas) appear to be
negative regulators. Currently, which outcome predominates under conditions of
antigenic challenge is poorly understood. In particular it has been suggested
that one consequence of antigenic activation of T cells is the up-regulation of
both CD95 and CD95 ligand, thereby exposing activated T cells to apoptotic death.
We have investigated this possibility in normal human peripheral blood T cells
triggered by the superantigen SEB either in the presence of endogenous APCs or
transfectants expressing DR4 and CD80. In either case, we find that such
activation does not expose the majority of T cells to anti-CD95-induced apoptosis
as detected by annexin V externalization and DNA fragmentation. Furthermore, by
phenotypically identifying, by flow cytometry, those cells that received both
antigenic and costimulatory signals from those cells that did not, we observed
that CD95-induced apoptosis was not seen in activated T cells receiving Ag and
costimulatory signals via CD28. However, while not all T cells were stimulated by
superantigen, CD95 expression was found to be homogeneously up-regulated,
suggesting a mechanism whereby bystander cells might be made susceptible to
CD95-induced death. We conclude that antigenic activation of T cells via the TCR 
and CD28 engagement provides protection from CD95-induced apoptosis.


PMID: 9498743  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

