
1. Int Rev Immunol. 1998;16(3-4):309-22.

Interleukin-7 (IL-7) knockout mice. Implications for lymphopoiesis and
organ-specific immunity.

Maeurer MJ(1), Lotze MT.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Microbiology, University of Mainz, FRG.
maeurer@omalley.zdv.uni-mainz.de

Interleukin-7 (IL-7) is produced by both immune and non-immune cells including
stromal cell lines, B-cells, monocytes/macrophages, follicular dendritic cells,
keratinocytes, and gut epithelial cells. The development of IL-7 knockout mice
aided to elucidate the role of this multifaceted cytokine in lymphopoiesis.
Additionally, IL-7 gene-deleted mice may represent an excellent model in order to
define the functional role of locally secreted IL-7 in organ-specific immunity
and in anti-microbial responses as well. For instance, analysis of IL-7
gene-deleted mice revealed reduced numbers of total T-lymphocytes with
preservation of the CD4/CD8 ratio and increased ratio of alpha beta + T-cells
compared to gamma delta + T-cells. Transition of pro-T-cells to pre-T-cells was
impaired. Cell marker analysis of thymocytes in IL-7 -/- mice suggested that IL-7
may induce expression of as yet unidentified cytokine receptors, and that IL-7
may also be critically involved in T-cell differentiation. However, there are
clear differences in the requirements of alpha beta or gamma delta T-cells for
IL-7. In general, IL-7 appears to serve as the major growth and differentiation
factor for gamma delta T-cells. IL-7 -/- mice are characterized by a block of
maturation of V gamma 3low, CD24+ T-cells to V gamma 3high, CD24low T-cells.
Thus, IL-7 does not only represent a 'maintenance factor', but rather a cytokine 
required for successful thymic and extrathymic development and maturation of
gamma delta T-cells. gamma delta + intestinal intraepithelial lymphocytes (iIEL) 
are absent in IL-7 -/- animals. In contrast, alpha beta + iIEL can be detected in
IL-7 gene-deleted animals, but not in gamma c, or in JAK-3 deficient mice
suggesting that alternative cytokines may be involved in development of iIEL
alpha beta + T-cells, but not necessarily for gamma delta T-cells. To this end,
IL-7 has predominantly been studied in the context of B- and T-cell development. 
With the availability of IL-7 gene-deleted mice, the paracrine effects of IL-7,
which may be secreted in vivo by non-immune cells including keratinocytes or gut 
epithelial cells, can now be critically examined.

DOI: 10.3109/08830189809042999 
PMID: 9505193  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

