
1. Protein Expr Purif. 1998 Mar;12(2):215-25.

Purification and characterization of recombinant forms of TCL-1 and MTCP-1
proteins.

Du Bois GC(1), Song SP, Kulikovskaya I, Virgilio L, Varnum J, Germann MW, Croce
CM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, Kimmel Cancer Institute, Thomas
Jefferson University, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania 19107, USA.

The TCL-1 gene which is located on chromosome 14 plays a major role in human
hematopoeitic malignancies and encodes a 14-kDa protein whose function has not
been determined. The TCL-1 gene is expressed in pre-B cells, in immature
thymocytes, and at low levels in activated T cells but not in peripheral mature B
cells and in normal cells. The TCL-1 protein is similar in its primary structure 
to a protein encoded by the mature T cell proliferation gene (MTCP-1). The MTCP-1
gene is located on the X chromosome and has been shown to be involved in rare
chromosomal translocations in T cell proliferative diseases. The TCL-1 and MTCP-1
genes appear to be members of a family of genes involved in lymphoid
proliferation and T cell malignancies. Our laboratory has undertaken the study of
the TCL-1 and MTCP-1 proteins to determine the structure and the function of
these related proteins. In the present report, we have produced, using a
bacterial expression system, both purified TCL-1 and MTCP-1 proteins in forms
with and without a six His tag sequence. The recombinant proteins were purified
by chromatography on a Ni-NTA resin followed by reverse-phase FPLC using a buffer
system at pH 7.9 and a polymeric-based reverse-phase column. The MTCP-1
recombinant proteins display greater solubility, do not form disulfide linked
dimers or oligomers, and elute at a lower isopropanol concentration than the
corresponding TCL-1 proteins. The purified recombinant TCL-1 and MTCP-1 proteins 
have been characterized by N-terminal sequence analysis, time of flight mass
spectrometry, and circular dichroism spectroscopy. Initial results have indicated
that the MTCP-1 protein with the His tag removed is suitable for both NMR and
X-ray crystallographic methods of structure determination.

DOI: 10.1006/prep.1997.0822 
PMID: 9518463  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

