
1. J Chromatogr A. 1998 Feb 6;795(2):277-87.

Bovine whey fractionation based on cation-exchange chromatography.

Hahn R(1), Schulz PM, Schaupp C, Jungbauer A.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Applied Microbiology, University of Agriculture, Forestry and
Biotechnology, Vienna, Austria.

Bovine whey proteins have potential applications in veterinary medicine, food
industry and as supplements for cell culture media. A fractionation scheme for
the economically interesting proteins, such as IgG, lactoferrin and
lactoperoxidase, based on cation exchangers was the goal of our investigations. A
chromatographic process was developed where alpha-lactalbumin passes through the 
column and separation of the desired proteins is achieved. Four different
cation-exchange media (S-HyperD-F, S-Sepharose FF, Fractogel EMD SO3- 650 (S) and
Macro-Prep High S Support) were compared in regard to their dynamic binding
capacity for IgG and their different elution behaviours when sequential step
gradients with NaCl buffers were applied. Peak fractions were analyzed by
size-exclusion chromatography and sodium dodecyl sulphate-polyacrylamide gel
electrophoresis. Lactoperoxidase activity was monitored by the oxidation of
o-phenylenediamine. In order to explain the different resolution behaviours,
isocratic runs with pure standards of whey proteins were performed. The k' values
were calculated and plotted against salt concentration. Fractogel EMD had the
highest binding capacity for IgG, 3.7 mg/ml gel at a linear flow-rate of 100
cm/h, but the resolution was low compared to that with the other three media.
S-Hyper D and S-Sepharose FF showed lower capacities, 3.3 and 3.2 mg/ml gel,
respectively, but exhibited better protein resolution. These effects could be
partially explained by the k' versus salt concentration plots. The binding
capacity of Macro-Prep S was considerably lower compared to that of the other
resins investigated because its selectivity for whey proteins was completely
different. S-Sepharose FF and S-Hyper D combine relatively high dynamic capacity 
for IgG and good resolution. Compared to studies with standard proteins, such as 
100 mg/ml bovine serum albumin for S-Hyper D, their binding capacities were very 
low. Even after removal of low-molecular-mass compounds, the capacity could not
be improved significantly. The running conditions (low pH) were responsible for
the low protein binding capacity, since low-molecular-mass compounds in the feed 
do not compete with the adsorption of whey protein. The dynamic capacity did not 
decrease to a large extent within the range of flow-rates (100-600 cm/h)
investigated. The dynamic capacity of HyperD and Fractogel was at least five
times higher when pure bovine IgG was used for determination. In conclusion,
S-Sepharose FF, S-Hyper D-F and Fractogel EMD SO3- 650 (S) are considered as
successful candidates for the large-scale purification of bovine whey proteins.

DOI: 10.1016/s0021-9673(97)01030-3 
PMID: 9528103  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

