
1. J Immunol. 1998 Jan 15;160(2):718-27.

Positive selection of thymocytes expressing the same TCR by different MHC ligands
results in the production of functionally distinct thymocytes distinguished by
differential expression of the heat stable antigen.

Teh HS(1), Motyka B, Teh SJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, University of British Columbia,
Vancouver, Canada.

The issue of whether the signaling process during positive selection can affect
the efficiency by which the positively selected T cells respond to antigenic
stimulation has not been addressed. We approached this question by determining
the consequences of positive selection of a particular transgenic TCR (2C TCR) in
the H-2b and the H-2k thymus. The H-2b thymus provides a strong
positive-selecting environment for the 2C TCR, whereas the H-2k thymus selects
weakly for the 2C TCR. Although the positively selected CD8 thymocytes from the
H-2b or H-2k thymus expressed similar levels of the CD8 coreceptor molecule,
those for the H-2k thymus expressed a slightly lower level of the 2C TCR. This
lower level of 2C TCR expression by H-2k CD8 thymocytes was not a result of
coexpression of endogenous TCRs. Interestingly, CD8 thymocytes from H-2k mice
were hyporesponsive to Ag stimulation compared with those from the H-2b mice. The
functional maturity of positively selected CD8 thymocytes from the H-2b or H-2k
thymus was inversely correlated with the level of heat stable Ag expressed by
these cells. Furthermore, TCR-derived signals appear to be more efficiently
coupled to downstream pathways leading to proliferation and cytokine production
in CD8 thymocytes from H-2b 2C mice than those derived from H-2k 2C mice. These
results provide the first demonstration that the intensity of the signaling
process during positive selection affects the efficiency by which TCR-derived
signals in positively selected thymocytes are coupled to downstream effector
pathways.


PMID: 9551907  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

