
1. J Immunol. 1998 Feb 1;160(3):1091-7.

Class I-restricted alloreactive cytotoxic T lymphocytes recognize a complex array
of specific MHC-associated peptides.

Wang W(1), Man S, Gulden PH, Hunt DF, Engelhard VH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology, Beirne Carter Center for Immunology Research,
Charlottesville, VA 22908, USA.

A major issue in understanding alloreactive T cell responses is whether the Ags
recognized reside in allogeneic MHC proteins themselves regardless of the
structure of the associated peptides or whether specific peptides presented by
allogeneic MHC proteins determine each epitope. We developed HLA-A*0201-specific 
alloreactive human CD8+ CTL lines and clones to address this issue. Acid
treatment of HLA-A*0201+ target cells resulted in the loss of Ab-defined epitopes
as well as recognition by all alloreactive CTL. In the presence of brefeldin A,
no class I molecules were re-expressed at the surface of the acid-treated cells. 
Addition of a mixture of synthetic peptides corresponding to known, naturally
processed, HLA-A*0201-associated peptides together with exogenous human beta2m
restored binding by specific Ab but not recognition by alloreactive CTL. However,
addition of a more complex mixture of peptides directly extracted from HLA-A*0201
reconstituted CTL recognition. This demonstrates that these alloreactive CTL
recognize specific peptides and not a common peptide-dependent conformation of
HLA-A*0201. Reverse phase HPLC fractionation of the extracted peptides resulted
in the loss of recognition by CTL lines from three individuals. This was not due 
to the loss of specific peptide species because repooling of the HPLC fractions
led to a recovery of recognition. Furthermore, three HLA-A*0201-alloreactive CTL 
clones recognized single distinct peptide peaks from the same HPLC fractionation.
These data suggest that the epitopes recognized in allogeneic responses to
HLA-A*0201 are complex, and the response is a result of recognition of multiple
unique peptide-MHC complexes.


PMID: 9570521  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

