
1. J Immunol. 1998 May 15;160(10):5122-9.

An sLex-deficient variant of HL60 cells exhibits high levels of adhesion to
vascular selectins: further evidence that HECA-452 and CSLEX1 monoclonal antibody
epitopes are not essential for high avidity binding to vascular selectins.

Wagers AJ(1), Stoolman LM, Craig R, Knibbs RN, Kansas GS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology-Immunology, Northwestern Medical School, Chicago,
IL 60611, USA.

Selectins are carbohydrate-binding cell adhesion molecules that play a key role
in the initiation of inflammatory responses. Several studies have suggested that 
the sialylated, fucosylated tetrasaccharide sialyl Lewis X (sLex) is an important
component of leukocyte ligands for E- and P-selectin. We have identified a stable
variant of the HL60 cell line, HL60var, which displays a nearly complete absence 
of staining with several mAb directed against sLex and/or sLex-related
structures. HL60var also exhibits a concomitant increase in reactivity with mAb
directed against the unsialylated Lewis X (Lex/CD15) structure. Despite this sLex
deficiency, HL60var binds well to both E- and P-selectin. No significant
differences in expression of alpha1,3-fucosyltransferases, C2GnT (Core2
transferase), or P-selectin glycoprotein ligand-1 between HL60var and typical
sLex(high) HL60 cells were detected. Although the precise molecular basis for the
sLex(-/low) phenotype of HL60var remains uncertain, flow cytometric analysis with
the sialic acid-specific Limax flavus lectin revealed a sharp reduction in
HL60var surface sialylation. Thus, the loss in mAb reactivity may result from a
loss of sialic acid residues from the mAb carbohydrate epitope. However, binding 
of HL60var to E- and P-selectin remains sensitive to neuraminidase treatment.
Taken together, these data indicate that high levels of surface sLex and/or
related epitopes are not essential for interactions with vascular selectins,
implying that as yet unidentified sialylated, fucosylated structures serve as
physiologically relevant ligands for E- and P-selectin.


PMID: 9590264  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

