
1. Blood Cells Mol Dis. 1998 Jun;24(2):124-36; discussion 137.

Involvement of H-ras in erythroid differentiation of TF1 and human umbilical cord
blood CD34 cells.

Ge Y(1), Li ZH, Marshall MS, Broxmeyer HE, Lu L.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology/Immunology, Indiana University School of Medicine, 
Indianapolis 46202, USA.

To investigate the role of the ras gene in erythroid differentiation, a human
erythroleukemic cell line, TF1, was transduced with a selectable retroviral
vector carrying a mammalian wild type H-ras gene or a cytoplasmic dominant
negative RAS1 gene. Transduction of TF1 cells with the wild type H-ras gene
resulted in changes of cell types and up-regulation of erythroid-specific gene
expression similar to that seen in differentiating erythroid cells. The number of
red blood cell containing colonies derived from TF1 cells transduced with wild
type H-ras cDNA was significantly increased and the cells in the colonies were
more hemoglobinized as estimated by a deeper red color compared to those colony
cells from mock or dominant negative RAS1 gene transduced TF1 cells, suggesting
increased erythroid differentiation of TF1 cells after transduction of wild type 
H-ras in vitro. The mRNA levels of beta- and gamma-, but not alpha-, globin genes
were significantly higher in H-ras transduced TF1 cells than those in TF1 cells
transduced with mock or dominant negative RAS1 gene. Moreover, a 4kb pre-mRNA of 
the Erythropoietin receptor (EpoR) was highly expressed only in H-ras transduced 
TF1 cells. Additionally, human umbilical cord blood (CB) CD34 cells which are
highly enriched for hematopoietic stem/progenitor cells were transduced with the 
same retroviral vectors to evaluate in normal primary cells the activities of
H-ras in erythroid differentiation. Increased numbers of erythroid cell
containing colonies (BFU-E and CFU-GEMM) were observed in CD34 cells transduced
with the H-ras cDNA, compared to that from mock transduced cells. These data
suggest a possible role for ras in erythroid differentiation.

DOI: 10.1006/bcmd.1998.0179 
PMID: 9628849  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

