
1. J Immunol. 1998 Jul 1;161(1):192-9.

Tissue-specific up-regulation of B7-1 expression and function during the course
of murine relapsing experimental autoimmune encephalomyelitis.

Karandikar NJ(1), Vanderlugt CL, Eagar T, Tan L, Bluestone JA, Miller SD.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology-Immunology, Interdepartmental Immunobiology Center,
Northwestern University Medical School, Chicago, IL 60611, USA.

B7/CD28-mediated costimulation is a promising target for therapeutic intervention
in autoimmune diseases. However, studies addressing the differential functional
roles of B7-1 and B7-2 in several autoimmune models have resulted in conflicting 
data, perhaps due to the temporal dynamics of B7-1 and B7-2 surface expression on
different cell types and/or at different sites during an autoimmune response. We 
examined the temporal expression of B7 costimulatory molecules in the CNS and in 
various lymphoid organs during the course of murine relapsing-remitting
experimental autoimmune encephalomyelitis (R-EAE). Following immunization of SJL 
mice with the immunodominant proteolipid protein epitope, PLP139-151, surface
expression of B7-1 was up-regulated on B cells, T cells, and macrophages,
relative to B7-2, on CNS-infiltrating cells and on splenocytes. Similar
enhancement in splenic B7-1 expression could be induced in SJL mice by the
adoptive transfer of PLP139-151-specific cells or by immunization with CFA alone.
These changes were not observed on lymph node cells, including those isolated
from lymph nodes draining the immunization site, which maintained the predominant
B7-2 expression pattern seen in naive mice. These phenotypic expression patterns 
correlated with the functional predominance of B7-1 in costimulating T cell
activation when employing APCs from the spleen or CNS of mice with ongoing R-EAE,
while B7-2 remained functionally predominant on lymph node APCs. Variation of
phenotypic expression and functional dominance of costimulatory molecule
expression in different lymphoid compartments during an active inflammatory
autoimmune response has important implications in immune regulation, autoimmune
pathogenesis, and therapeutic strategies.


PMID: 9647224  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

