
1. J Immunol. 1998 Jul 15;161(2):814-20.

HLA class II expression in uninducible hepatocarcinoma cells after transfection
of AIR-1 gene product CIITA: acquisition of antigen processing and presentation
capacity.

Sartoris S(1), Valle MT, Barbaro AL, Tosi G, Cestari T, D'Agostino A, Megiovanni 
AM, Manca F, Accolla RS.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Immunology and Infectious Diseases, University of Verona, Italy.

The AIR-1-encoded CIITA transcriptional activator is crucial for both
constitutive and IFN-gamma-induced MHC class II gene transcription. We show here 
that the MHC class II negative phenotype of the human hepatocarcinoma cell lines 
Alexander and HepG2 remains unmodified after treatment with IFN-gamma, although
MHC class I expression is up-modulated. This correlates with absence of CIITA
mature transcripts. Transfection of an expressible CIITA cDNA in Alexander cells 
resulted in a very high cell surface expression of all three human class II
subsets, HLA-DR, -DP and -DQ, indicating that normally observed induction of
CIITA expression by IFN-gamma is probably blocked, in the hepatocarcinoma cell
lines, at the level of CIITA transcription and not at the level of IFN-gamma
receptor binding and signal transduction mechanisms. To assess whether MHC class 
II expression on CIITA-transfected Alexander cells could have functional
relevance, we tested their capacity to present antigenic peptides to an
HLA-DR-restricted T cell line specific for a peptide of Mycobacterium
tuberculosis Ag85 protein. It was found that the transfected cells could not only
present the exogenously supplemented peptide but also process Ag85 protein to
generate the specific epitope recognized by the HLA-DR-restricted T cell line.
Similar results were obtained with CIITA-transfected CFPAC-1 pancreatic
adenocarcinoma cells, which differed from Alexander cells in that they were
inducible by IFN-gamma. These results suggest new strategies to act on CIITA for 
increasing the potential of a tumor cell to present putative tumor Ags to the
immune system.


PMID: 9670958  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

