
1. J Immunol. 1998 Aug 1;161(3):1406-13.

Sequence-based typing provides a new look at HLA-C diversity.

Turner S(1), Ellexson ME, Hickman HD, Sidebottom DA, Fernández-Viña M, Confer DL,
Hildebrand WH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, University of Oklahoma Health
Sciences Center, Oklahoma City 73190, USA.

Although extensive HLA-A and HLA-B polymorphism is evident, the true diversity of
HLA-C has remained hidden due to poor resolution of HLA-C Ags. To better
understand the polymorphic nature of HLA-C molecules, 1823 samples from the
National Marrow Donor Program research repository in North America have been
typed by DNA sequencing and interpreted in terms of HLA-C diversification.
Results show that HLA-Cw*0701 was the most common allele with a frequency of 16%,
whereas 28% of the alleles typed as Cw12-18 (serologic blanks). The frequency of 
homozygotes was 9.8% as compared with previous studies of 18% for
sequence-specific primers and 50% for serology. Most startling was the frequency 
at which new alleles were detected; 19 new HLA-C alleles were detected,
representing a rate of approximately 1 in 100 samples typed. These new HLA-C
alleles result from 29 nucleotide substitutions of which 4 are silent, such that 
coding substitutions concentrated about the Ag-binding groove predominate.
Polymorphism at the HLA-C locus therefore resembles that at the HLA-A and HLA-B
loci more than previously believed, indicating that antigenic stress is driving
HLA-C evolution. However, sequence conservation in the alpha-helix of the first
domain and a clustering of unique amino acids around the B pocket indicate that
HLA-C alleles respond to antigenic pressures differently than HLA-A and HLA-B.
Finally, because the samples characterized were predominantly from Caucasians, we
hypothesize that HLA-C polymorphism will equal or exceed that of the HLA-A and -B
loci as DNA sequence-based typing is extended to include more non-Caucasian
individuals.


PMID: 9686604  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

