
1. Kaohsiung J Med Sci. 1998 Jun;14(6):367-78.

[Interleukin-6 production by human gingival fibroblasts following stimulation
with Actinobacillus actinomycetemcomitans].

[Article in Chinese]

Chen CC(1), Chang KL, Huang JF, Huang JS, Tsai CC.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Periodontology, School of Dentistry, Kaohsiung Medical College, 
Republic of China.

Actinobacillus actinomycetemcomitans(Aa), elaborating a multiplicity of virulence
factor and tissue-damaging products, is considered an etiological agent in
periodontal disease. Serotype b is the most frequently isolated serotype in
localized juvenile periodontitis patients, suggesting a particularly high
periodontopathic potential for serotype b strains. Interleukin-6(IL-6) plays an
important role in the mediation of inflammatory and immune responses as well as
in the osteoclastic bone resorption. However, there is little information
regarding the effect of the different serotypes of Aa on IL-6 production by human
gingival fibroblasts (HGF). Therefore, the purpose of this study was to compare
the ability of the three serotypes (a, b, and c) of Aa sonicates to induce the
production of IL-6 by HGF. In fibroblast cultures, confluent monolayers of HGF
were incubated with sonic extracts of Aa-511 (serotype a), Aa-Y4 (serotype b),
and Aa-652 (serotype c) at various concentrations for 48 h at 37 degrees C in 5% 
CO2 and air. At the end of the culture period, supernatants were collected and
analysed for IL-6 content by using EIA and bioassay. In order to compare the
effects of non-lipopolysaccharide (LPS) activation of Aa sonicates on IL-6
production by HGF, we added polymyxin B in cultures with Aa sonicates to bind
LPS. The results were summarized as follows. (1) All three serotypes of Aa
sonicates had similar dose-dependent stimulant effects on IL-6 production by HGF,
and the biological activities of IL-6 correlated with their immunoreactivities.
(2) The maximum releases of IL-6 by HGF were achieved at concentrations of 10 to 
100 micrograms protein/mL of Aa sonicates, and the ability of Aa-Y4 to induce the
release of IL-6 was higher than that of Aa-511 and Aa-652 at these
concentrations. (3) Polymyxin B (50 micrograms/mL) effectively decreased the
amounts of IL-6 produced by stimulation of the HGF with 10 micrograms protein/mL 
of Aa sonicates. However, the polymyxin B-treated Aa-Y4 sonicate showed a higher 
ability to induce the release of IL-6 than the other two strains. These results
indicate that Aa-Y4 (serotype b) has a higher potency to induce HGF secretion of 
IL-6; thus contributing to a comparatively stronger efficacy to the destruction
of periodontal tissue in periodontitis.


PMID: 9715039  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

