
1. J Immunol. 1998 Sep 1;161(5):2400-6.

CTL response to Mycobacterium tuberculosis: identification of an immunogenic
epitope in the 19-kDa lipoprotein.

Mohagheghpour N(1), Gammon D, Kawamura LM, van Vollenhoven A, Benike CJ, Engleman
EG.

Author information: 
(1)Kuzell Institute for Arthritis and Infectious Diseases, California Pacific
Medical Center Research Institute, San Francisco 94115, USA.
nahid@cooper.cpmc.org

The successful resolution of infection with Mycobacterium tuberculosis (M.tb) is 
believed to involve the induction of CTLs that are capable of killing cells
harboring this pathogen, although little information is known about the MHC
restriction or fine specificity of such CTLs. In this study, we used knowledge of
the HLA-A*0201-binding motif and an immunofluorescence-based peptide-binding
assay to screen for potential HLA-A*0201-binding epitopes contained in the 19-kDa
lipoprotein of M.tb (M.tb19). CD8+ T cells derived from HLA-A*0201+ patients with
active tuberculosis (TB) as well as tuberculin skin test-positive individuals who
had no history of TB were used as effector cells to determine whether these
epitopes are recognized by in vivo-primed CTLs. An in vitro vaccination system
using HLA-A*0201+ dendritic cells (DCs) as APCs was used to determine whether
these epitopes can sensitize naive CD8+ T cells in vitro, leading to the
generation of Ag-specific CTLs. The results show that an HLA-A*0201-binding
peptide comprised of residues 88 to 97 of M.tb19 (P88-97) is recognized by
circulating CD8+ CTLs from both healthy tuberculin skin test-positive individuals
and patients with active TB but not by tuberculin skin test-negative subjects.
Moreover, dendritic cells pulsed with this peptide induced class I MHC-restricted
CTLs from the T cells of healthy unsensitized persons. Finally, CTL lines that
were specific for P88-97 were shown to lyse autologous monocytes that had been
infected acutely with the H37Ra strain of M.tb. These results demonstrate that
M.tb19 elicits HLA class I-restricted CTLs in vitro and in vivo that recognize
endogenously processed Ag. Epitopes of the type identified here may prove useful 
in the design of an M.tb vaccine.


PMID: 9725236  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

