
1. J Immunol. 1998 Sep 1;161(5):2580-5.

Macrophage-inflammatory protein-3 beta/EBI1-ligand chemokine/CK beta-11, a CC
chemokine, is a chemoattractant with a specificity for macrophage progenitors
among myeloid progenitor cells.

Kim CH(1), Pelus LM, White JR, Broxmeyer HE.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology/Immunology, Indiana University School of Medicine, 
Indianapolis 46202, USA.

Chemoattractants are potential factors influencing cell migration. Stromal
cell-derived factor-1, a CXC chemokine, is the only chemokine reported to have
chemotactic activity for hemopoietic progenitor cells (HPC). We report in this
work another chemokine of the CC subfamily, which is chemotactic for HPC.
Macrophage-inflammatory protein (MIP)-3 beta/EBI1-ligand chemokine/CK beta-11
attracted bone marrow and cord blood CD34+ cells. In contrast to stromal
cell-derived factor-1, which attracts multiple types of HPC, MIP-3beta attracted 
mainly CFU granulocyte macrophage, but not other HPC such as burst-forming unit
erythrocyte or CFU granulocyte, erythrocyte, macrophage, and megakaryocyte.
Chemoattracted CD34+ cells formed CFU granulocyte macrophage-like colonies, which
were morphologically determined as large macrophages. These progenitors were
selectively responsive to stimulation by macrophage CSF, demonstrating that MIP-3
beta attracts macrophage progenitors. Expression of CCR7, the receptor for MIP-3 
beta, was detected at a mRNA level in the attracted CD34+ cells as well as input 
CD34+HPC. Expression of MIP-3 beta mRNA was not constitutive, but was inducible
in bone marrow stromal cells by inflammatory agents such as bacterial LPS,
IFN-gamma, and TNF-alpha. Taken together, our findings suggest that MIP-3 beta is
expressed in the bone marrow environment after induction with certain
inflammatory cytokines and LPS, and may play a role in trafficking of macrophage 
progenitors in and out of the bone marrow in inflammatory conditions.


PMID: 9725259  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

