
1. J Cell Sci. 1998 Nov;111 ( Pt 21):3145-56.

ELAV protein HuA (HuR) can redistribute between nucleus and cytoplasm and is
upregulated during serum stimulation and T cell activation.

Atasoy U(1), Watson J, Patel D, Keene JD.

Author information: 
(1)Departments of Microbiology, Immunology and Medicine, Duke University Medical 
Center, Durham, NC 27710 USA.

ELAV proteins are implicated in regulating the stability and translation of
cytokine and growth regulatory mRNAs such as GM-CSF, IL-2, c-myc, c-fos and GLUT1
by binding to their AU-rich 3'UTRs. The tissue-specific ELAV protein HuB (aka.
Hel-N1) is predominantly cytoplasmic and has been shown to stabilize GLUT1 and
c-myc mRNAs and to increase their translation following ectopic expression in
3T3-L1 cells. We report that the most widely expressed mouse ELAV protein, mHuA, 
is predominately nuclear in cultured NIH-3T3 cells, but is localized in the
cytoplasm during early G1 of the cell cycle. Therefore, much like the primarily
cytoplasmic HuB, HuA becomes temporally localized in the cytoplasm where it can
potentially regulate the stability or translation of bound mRNAs. Moreover, we
report that stimulation of mouse spleen cells using either mitogenic or
sub-mitogenic levels of anti-CD3/CD28 resulted in a dramatic increase in the
level of HuA. Upregulation of HuA corresponds to previously documented increases 
in cytokine expression which are due to increased mRNA stability following T cell
activation. Consistent with these findings, HuA was down regulated in quiescent
cells and upregulated in 3T3 cells following serum stimulation. The increase of
murine HuA during the cell cycle closely resembles that of cyclin B1 which peaks 
in G2/M. Together with our earlier studies, these data indicate that mammalian
ELAV proteins function during cell growth and differentiation due in part to
their effects on posttranscriptional stability and translation of multiple growth
regulatory mRNAs. This supports the hypothesis that ELAV proteins can function as
transacting factors which affect a default pathway of mRNA degradation involved
in the expression of growth regulatory proteins.


PMID: 9763509  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

