
1. Bioseparation. 1998;7(2):107-15.

Ribose-5-phosphate isomerase from Saccharomyces cerevisiae: purification and
molecular analysis of the enzyme.

Reuter R(1), Naumann M, Bär J, Miosga T, Kopperschläger G.

Author information: 
(1)Institut für Biochemie, Universitätsklinikum, Universität Leipzig, Germany.

Purification and molecular analysis of ribose-5-phosphate isomerase (EC 5.3.1.6) 
from Saccharomyces cerevisiae is described first time. The enzyme was enriched
from a haploid deletion mutant containing the wild-type gene on a multicopy
plasmid elaborating the following steps: ammonium sulphate precipitation,
interfacial salting out on Sepharose 6B, high performance liquid chromatography
on Fractogel EMD DEAE and on Resource Phenyl. The enzyme activity was found to be
rather unstable possibly caused by removal of stabilizing cofactors or proteins
during the purification procedure. The purified enzyme showed a hyperbolic
dependence on the substrate ribose-5-phosphate with a K(m)-value of 1.6 +/- 0.3
mmol/l. For the native enzyme a molecular mass of 115 +/- 10 kDa was determined
as found by saccharose density gradient centrifugation, sedimentation equilibrium
analysis, size exclusion chromatography and polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis.
Sodium dodecyl sulphate polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis and Western blotting
revealed one band with a molecular mass of 31 +/- 2 kDa. Thus, the native enzyme 
is composed of four subunits of identical size. The molecular mass of the subunit
and the identified N-terminal sequence of 33 amino acids fits well the 258 amino 
acid protein encoded by the S. cerevisiae RKI open reading frame, which was
characterized previously only by increasing specific activities of
ribose-5-phosphate isomerase in cells after cloning the gene. On the basis of the
conserved amino acids an alignment of the amino acid sequence of
ribose-5-phosphate isomerase from yeast with those of the enzyme from mouse,
spinach and Escherichia coli is presented.

DOI: 10.1023/a:1008087903817 
PMID: 9763699  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

