
1. Mol Cell Biol. 1998 Nov;18(11):6711-8.

Akt-dependent and -independent survival signaling pathways utilized by
insulin-like growth factor I.

Kulik G(1), Weber MJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology, University of Virginia Health Sciences Center,
Charlottesville, Virginia 22908, USA. gak5g@virginia.edu

Protein kinase B (PKB)/Akt is implicated in survival signaling in a wide variety 
of cells including fibroblasts and epithelial and neuronal cells. We and others
have described a linear survival signaling cascade used by insulinlike growth
factor I (IGF-I) that consists of the IGF-I receptor, phosphoinositide 3-kinase
(PI3 kinase), Akt, and Bad. Activation of this pathway can be sufficient to
protect cells from apoptosis. However, previous work had not determined whether
this pathway is invariably necessary for protection from apoptosis or whether
there are alternative survival signaling pathways. In this communication, we
report the existence of two survival signaling pathways, one dependent on PI3
kinase and Akt and the other independent of these enzymes. We found that survival
signaling initiated by IGF-I treatment of Rat-1 cells could be blocked by
overexpression of a dominant negative kinase-deficient Akt (K179A) as well as by 
wortmannin. This demonstrates a survival signaling pathway dependent on PI3
kinase and Akt. However, when IGF-I receptors were overexpressed in a Rat-1
background (RIG cells), an alternative pathway became apparent, in which survival
mediated by IGF-I was no longer sensitive to wortmannin or to overexpression of
dominant negative Akt, even though Akt activation and Bad phosphorylation were
still wortmannin sensitive. Experiments with inhibitors of RNA synthesis showed
that transcriptional activation is dispensable for this alternative PI3
kinase/Akt-independent survival signaling. These findings demonstrate the
existence of a new survival signaling pathway independent of PI3 kinase, Akt, and
new transcription and which is evident in fibroblasts overexpressing the IGF-I
receptor.

DOI: 10.1128/mcb.18.11.6711 
PMCID: PMC109254
PMID: 9774684  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

