
1. Zentralbl Bakteriol Orig B. 1976 Jul;162(3-4):233-87.

[Microorganisms in drugs and cosmetics - occurrence, harms and consequences in
hygienic manufacturing (author's transl)].

[Article in German]

Grigo J.

The quantity of pharmaceutical and cosmetic products with different composition
and the diversity of contaminating microorganisms set up special problems for
each product with its specific field of application. It is not exact to
generalize the hazard of contaminating microorganisms to product cathegories.
Some product cathegories however are more imperilled to be contaminated with
microorganisms and they are more hazardous than other ones. The most important
component of the living matter is water that decides on growth, multiplication
and survival of microorganisms in drugs and cosmetics. Products with a high
content of available water are the most problematic ones. The consequences of
survival and multiplication of microorganisms in relation to metabolic activity, 
pathogenicity and route of administration can be harmless or fatal. The nutritive
wants of many microorganisms are very small, even simple salt solutions do not
exclude microbial growth. There scarcely exist substrates not used as energy
source by any microorganism and so it does not wonder that desinfectants are also
used. Added preservatives may be absorbed or inactivated by suspended anorganic
components, swelling agents, solubilizers etc., the containers or its closing. In
the water phase of emulsions, in which under special conditions smaller amounts
of the preservative are available, microorganisms sometimes can multiply. Skin
care products neither belonging to pharmaceuticals nor to cosmetics present
special clinical problems. Many times creams and lotions contain ingredients
metabolized by microorganisms. Ointments and oils can be overgrown only by highly
specialized organisms but if there is condensed water as a film at boundary
surfaces much more microorganism species can grow. When using cosmetics it must
be considered that parts of them will get into the eye. The eye is really
endangered by Pseudomonads, which can according to the composition multiply in
shampoos and whose contact to the eye can not be excluded. Syrups and solutions
contain sugar concentrations, which suppress growth of most microorganisms except
osmotolerant germs. Because of their low water content powders normally are
protected against microbial growth but they should be free from clostridial
spores for a mixture of powder and sweat is a good nutrient medium to Clostridia 
and fungi. Powders for surgical use must be sterile. Tablets and dragees do not
allow microbial multiplication because of their low water activity. Under bad
storage conditions a local increase of water content may permit microbial growth 
at the surface, especially in hygroscopicity. Fortunately there is seen a trend
of not using multi-dose-containers for injections because of the high risk of
contamination. It is to develop single-dose-containers also for other groups of
preparations especially for eye-preparations. Many products microbiologically
unobjectionable produced are contaminated in use, they contain the spectrum of
microorganisms of the area of application...


PMID: 983538  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

