
1. Croat Med J. 1998 Dec;39(4):392-400.

E. Coli bacteremia-induced changes in the skeletal muscle microcirculation vary
with anesthetics.

Lüebbe AS(1), Harris PD, Garrison RN.

Author information: 
(1)Cecilien-Klinik, An der Martinusquelle 10, D-33175 Bad Lippspringe, Germany.
cec.luebbe@t-online.de

AIM: To test if anesthetic procedures change the hemodynamic pattern in animals
with experimental septic shock.
METHODS: The effect of two anesthetics on systemic hemodynamic and skeletal
muscle microcirculatory responses in high cardiac output live E. coli bacteremia 
was studied in rats and compared to the effect of two other anesthetic procedures
in previously published studies.
RESULTS: Baseline blood pressures and cardiac outputs were similar in rats with
decerebrate, ketamine/xylazine, pentobarbital or urethane/chloralose anesthesia. 
There was a relative baseline tachycardia in decerebrate rats. Ketamine/xylazine 
anesthetized rats had reduced blood pressure, cardiac output, and heart rate. In 
decerebrate, pentobarbital, and urethane/chloralose anesthesia, cardiac output
increased initially during bacteremia but did not remain elevated in
pentobarbital anesthesia. Blood pressure and heart rate remained constant in
pentobarbital, decerebrate, and urethane/chloralose anesth esia. During
bacteremia, cardiac output, blood pressure, and vascular resistance did not
change with ketamine/xylazine, but the heart rate increased. Baseline diameters
of cremaster muscle large (A1) arterioles were higher in decerebrate anesthesia. 
A1 arterioles constricted during high cardiac output bacteremia in decerebrate
rats, and pentobarbital or urethane/chloralose-anesthetized rats. A4 arterioles
in bacteremia dilated in decerebrate and pentobarbital anesthesia, but did not
change under urethane/chloralose and ketamine/xylazine anesthesia.
CONCLUSION: Anesthetics influence baseline systemic variables and the response of
systemic hemodynamics of rats to E. coli bacteremia. During bacteremia,
anesthetics primarily affect the reactivity of skeletal muscle small arterioles. 
Ketamine/xylazine anesthesia has the most pronounced effect on systemic and
microcirculatory variables and seems to be an inappropriate choice in sepsis
experiments in rats.


PMID: 9841938  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

