
1. Am J Respir Cell Mol Biol. 1998 Dec;19(6):920-8.

Effects of ion composition and tonicity on human neutrophil antibacterial
activity.

Verghese MW(1), Boucher RC.

Author information: 
(1)Cystic Fibrosis/Pulmonary Research and Treatment Center, Division of Pulmonary
Medicine, The University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill, Chapel Hill, North
Carolina 27599-7248, USA. MWV@med.unc.edu

Infants with cystic fibrosis (CF) often are infected with Staphylococcus aureus
(S. aur.), which is followed by colonization with Pseudomonas aeruginosa (P.
aerug.). In spite of an excessive, neutrophil-dominated inflammatory response in 
the respiratory tract, patients with CF often succumb to pulmonary infections
with P. aerug. Because peripheral blood neutrophils of these patients have normal
functions, we examined whether hypothesized alterations of the airway surface
liquids (ASL) in these patients significantly impair neutrophil bactericidal
activity in the microenvironment of the CF lung. The ionic composition of CF ASL 
is still not entirely defined and has been speculated to be abnormally high or
abnormally low in Na+ and Cl- concentrations; estimates of osmolarities have
ranged from 200 (hypo-osmolar) to 285 (iso-osmolar) to > 300 meq/L
(hyper-osmolar). Our data indicate that bacterial killing activity of human
peripheral blood neutrophils against P. aerug. or S. aur. is not decreased in
buffers in which NaCl was replaced with equimolar concentrations of choline Cl,
KCl, or N-methyl-D-glucamine chloride to maintain isotonicity. Amiloride or
benzamil, known modulators of Na+ transport in neutrophils, did not interfere
with this neutrophil function. Deviations from isotonicity of +/- 50% also failed
to diminish bactericidal activity of neutrophils significantly. In contrast,
superoxide production and enzyme secretion in response to the chemotactic peptide
N-formylmethionylleucylphenylalanine appeared to be sensitive to the ionic milieu
of the assay buffers. Our results suggest that the postulated alterations in the 
ionic composition of ASL in CF lungs are insufficient to explain why neutrophils 
fail to clear infections with P. aerug. in these patients.

DOI: 10.1165/ajrcmb.19.6.3290 
PMID: 9843926  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

