
1. Mol Immunol. 1998 Oct;35(14-15):997-1014.

Interleukin-4 overcomes the negative influence of cyclic AMP accumulation on
antigen receptor stimulated B lymphocytes.

Venkataraman C(1), Chelvarajan RL, Cambier JC, Bondada S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Immunology and Sanders-Brown Center on Aging,
University of Kentucky, Lexington 40536, USA.

Activation of protein kinase A (PKA) in B lymphocytes prior to the ligation of
the B cell antigen receptor (BCR) results in a profound inhibition of BCR induced
proliferation. The major effect of increased PKA activity in B lymphocytes was
the induction of apoptosis leading to a reduced BCR induced growth response. The 
growth promoting cytokine IL-4 rescued B lymphocytes from PKA mediated negative
effects. IL-4 protected BCR stimulated cells from PKA mediated inhibition
primarily by preventing apoptosis and growth arrest. PKA-activation caused a
downregulation of anti-IgM induced expression of Bcl-xL protein, that was
restored by IL-4. Previous studies have shown that PKA-activation blocks BCR
induced phospholipase Cgamma-activation and calcium mobilization. IL-4 was unable
to overcome the block in anti-IgM mediated calcium mobilization due to
PKA-activation. B cell apoptosis induced by PKA-activation was also seen in CD72 
stimulated cells, although CD72 mediated B-lymphocyte proliferation was not
affected. PKA mediated block in phospholipase gamma-activation and calcium
mobilization were not due to alterations in the activation of tyrosine kinases
lyn, blk and syk. Moreover, BCR mediated tyrosine phosphorylation of PLC gamma2
and CD19 were also unaffected by cAMP accumulation. These observations are in
contrast to the ability of PKA to drastically reduce the activity of ZAP-70 and
syk in T lymphocytes and neutrophils, respectively. The IL-4 mediated protection 
appears to be due to a change in late events in BCR signaling, which are
important for Bcl-xL expression.

DOI: 10.1016/s0161-5890(98)00068-6 
PMID: 9881695  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

