
1. J Biol Chem. 2001 Mar 16;276(11):8328-40. Epub 2000 Nov 30.

X protein of hepatitis B virus inhibits Fas-mediated apoptosis and is associated 
with up-regulation of the SAPK/JNK pathway.

Diao J(1), Khine AA, Sarangi F, Hsu E, Iorio C, Tibbles LA, Woodgett JR,
Penninger J, Richardson CD.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Biophysics, University of Toronto, Toronto, Ontario M5G 
2M9, Canada.

The X protein from a chronic strain of hepatitis B virus (HBx) was determined to 
inhibit Fas-mediated apoptosis and promote cell survival. Fas-mediated apoptosis 
is the major cause of hepatocyte damage during liver disease. Experiments
demonstrated that cell death caused by anti-Fas antibodies was blocked by the
expression of HBx in human primary hepatocytes and mouse embryo fibroblasts. This
effect was also observed in mouse erythroleukemia cells that lacked p53,
indicating that protection against Fas-mediated apoptosis was independent of p53.
Components of the signal transduction pathways involved in this protection were
studied. The SAPK/JNK pathway has previously been suggested to be a survival
pathway for some cells undergoing Fas-mediated apoptosis, and kinase assays
showed that SAPK activity was highly up-regulated in cells expressing the HBx
protein. Normal mouse fibroblasts expressing HBx were protected from death,
whereas identical fibroblasts lacking the SEK1 component from the SAPK pathway
succumbed to Fas-mediated apoptosis, whether HBx was present or not. Assays
showed that caspase 3 and 8 activities and the release of cytochrome c from
mitochondria were inhibited, in the presence of HBx, following stimulation with
anti-Fas antibodies. Coprecipitation and confocal immunofluorescence microscopy
experiments demonstrated that HBx localizes with a cytoplasmic complex containing
MEKK1, SEK1, SAPK, and 14-3-3 proteins. Finally, mutational analysis of HBx
demonstrated that a potential binding region for 14-3-3 proteins was essential
for induction of SAPK/JNK activity and protection from Fas-mediated apoptosis.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.M006026200 
PMID: 11099494  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

