
1. J Virol. 2001 Jan;75(1):143-50.

Envelope protein-mediated down-regulation of hepatitis B virus receptor in
infected hepatocytes.

Breiner KM(1), Urban S, Glass B, Schaller H.

Author information: 
(1)Mikrobiologie and Zentrum für Molekulare Biologie, Universität Heidelberg,
69120 Heidelberg, Germany.

Entry of duck hepatitis B virus (DHBV) is initiated by specific interaction of
its large envelope protein (L) with a cellular entry receptor, recently
identified as carboxypeptidase D (CPD; historically gp180). In this report, we
present evidence demonstrating that this receptor is down-regulated as a result
of DHBV infection: (i) receptor levels determined by Western blot were much
reduced in DHBV-infected duck livers and undetectable by immunostaining in
infected cultured hepatocytes; (ii) results from metabolic labeling experiments
indicate enhanced receptor protein turnover; (iii) the kinetics of receptor loss 
from newly infected cells correlated with the accumulation of newly synthesized
viral protein; (iv) expression of DHBV L protein, transduced from a recombinant
adenovirus, was sufficient to eliminate gp180/CPD from the Golgi compartment, its
normal predominant location; (v) gp180/CPD remained absent from the Golgi
compartment in infected hepatocytes, even after overexpression from a recombinant
adenovirus, while residual amounts subsequently became detectable in a
perinuclear compartment, containing DHBV L protein; (vi) expression of DHBV L
protein in a HepG2 cell line, stably expressing gp180/CPD, leads to incomplete
receptor maturation and induces its degradation. Taken together, these data are
consistent with a model in which the virus receptor interacts early in the
biosynthetic pathway with the viral L protein, leading to its retention in a
pre-Golgi compartment and to subsequent degradation, thus preventing receptor
interference with the export of DHBV via the secretory pathway which it shares
with its receptor. Accordingly, and analogously with receptor down-regulation in 
retroviral systems, DHBV receptor down-modulation may account for the
much-reduced efficiency of DHBV superinfection of preinfected hepatocytes.

DOI: 10.1128/JVI.75.1.143-150.2001 
PMCID: PMC113907
PMID: 11119583  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

