
1. J Virol. 2001 Mar;75(5):2174-84.

Type B leukemogenic virus has a T-cell-specific enhancer that binds AML-1.

Mertz JA(1), Mustafa F, Meyers S, Dudley JP.

Author information: 
(1)Section of Molecular Genetics and Microbiology and Institute for Cellular and 
Molecular Biology, The University of Texas at Austin, Austin, Texas 78712, USA.

Type B leukemogenic virus (TBLV) induces rapidly appearing T-cell tumors in mice.
TBLV is highly related to mouse mammary tumor virus (MMTV) except that TBLV long 
terminal repeats (LTRs) have a deletion of negative regulatory elements and a
triplication of sequences flanking the deletion. To determine if the LTR
triplication represents a viral enhancer element, we inserted the triplication
upstream and downstream in either orientation relative to the thymidine kinase
promoter linked to the luciferase gene. These experiments showed that
upregulation of reporter gene activity by the TBLV triplication was relatively
orientation independent, consistent with the activity of eukaryotic enhancer
elements. TBLV enhancer activity was observed in T-cell lines but not in
fibroblasts, B cells, or mammary cells, suggesting that enhancer function is cell
type dependent. To analyze the transcription factor binding sites that are
important for TBLV enhancer function, we prepared substitution mutations in a
reconstituted C3H MMTV LTR that recapitulates the deletion observed in the TBLV
LTR. Transient transfections showed that a single mutation (556M) decreased TBLV 
enhancer activity at least 20-fold in two different T-cell lines. This mutation
greatly diminished AML-1 (recently renamed RUNX1) binding in gel shift assays
with a mutant oligonucleotide, whereas AML-1 binding to a wild-type TBLV oligomer
was specific, as judged by competition and supershift experiments. The 556
mutation also reduced TBLV enhancer binding of two other protein complexes,
called NF-A and NF-B, that did not appear to be related to c-Myb or Ets. AML-1
overexpression in a mammary cell line enhanced expression from the TBLV LTR
approximately 30-fold. These data suggest that binding of AML-1 to the TBLV
enhancer, likely in combination with other factors, is necessary for optimal
enhancer function.

DOI: 10.1128/JVI.75.5.2174-2184.2001 
PMCID: PMC114801
PMID: 11160721  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

