
1. Virology. 2001 May 10;283(2):178-87.

Hepatitis C virus core protein enhances FADD-mediated apoptosis and suppresses
TRADD signaling of tumor necrosis factor receptor.

Zhu N(1), Ware CF, Lai MM.

Author information: 
(1)Howard Hughes Medical Institute, University of Southern California Keck School
of Medicine, Los Angeles, California 90033, USA.

Hepatitis C virus (HCV) core protein has been shown to interact with the death
domain (DD) of tumor necrosis factor receptor-1 (TNFR1). In this study, we
further examined the interaction of the core protein with the signaling molecules
of TNFR1, including FADD, TRADD, and TRAF2, in a human embryonic kidney cell
line, HEK-293, that overexpresses the HCV core protein. This core
protein-expressing cell line exhibited enhanced sensitivity to TNF-induced
apoptosis. By in vitro binding and in vivo coimmunoprecipitation assays, we
showed that the HCV core protein interacted with the DD of FADD and enhanced
apoptosis induced by FADD overexpression. This enhancement could be blocked by a 
dominant-negative mutant of FADD. In contrast, the core protein did not directly 
interact with the DD of TRADD, but could disrupt the binding of TRADD to TNFR1.
TRAF2 recruitment to the TNFR1 signaling complex was also disrupted by the core
protein. Correspondingly, TRAF2-dependent activation of the protein kinase JNK
was suppressed in the core protein-expressing cells. However, NF kappa B
activation by TNF was not significantly altered by the HCV core protein,
suggesting the existence of TRAF2-independent pathways for NF kappa B activation.
These results combined indicate that the HCV core protein sensitizes cells to
TNF-induced apoptosis primarily by facilitating FADD recruitment to TNFR1. The
inhibition of JNK activation by the HCV core protein may also contribute to the
increased propensity of cells for apoptosis. These results, in comparison with
other published studies, suggest that the effects of the HCV core protein and
their underlying mechanisms vary significantly among cells of different origins.

Copyright 2001 Academic Press.

DOI: 10.1006/viro.2001.0896 
PMID: 11336543  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

