
1. J Virol. 2001 Oct;75(19):8937-48.

Replication of the wild type and a natural hepatitis B virus nucleocapsid
promoter variant is differentially regulated by nuclear hormone receptors in cell
culture.

Tang H(1), Raney AK, McLachlan A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell Biology, The Scripps Research Institute, La Jolla,
California 92037, USA.

A natural hepatitis B virus (HBV) variant associated with seroconversion from
HBeAg to anti-HBe antibody contains two nucleotide substitutions (A1764T and
G1766A) in the proximal nuclear hormone receptor binding site in the nucleocapsid
promoter. These nucleotide substitutions prevent the binding of the retinoid X
receptor alpha (RXR alpha)-peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor alpha (PPAR
alpha) heterodimer without greatly altering the efficiency of binding of
hepatocyte nuclear factor 4 (HNF4) to this recognition sequence. In addition,
these nucleotide substitutions create a new binding site for HNF1. Analysis of
HBV transcription and replication in nonhepatoma cells indicates that RXR
alpha-PPAR alpha heterodimers support higher levels of pregenomic RNA
transcription from the wild-type than from the variant nucleocapsid promoter,
producing higher levels of wild-type than of variant replication intermediates.
In contrast, HNF4 supports higher levels of pregenomic RNA transcription from the
variant than from the wild-type nucleocapsid promoter, producing higher levels of
variant than of wild-type replication intermediates. HNF1 can support variant
virus replication at a low level but is unable to support replication of the
wild-type HBV genome. These observations indicate that the replication of
wild-type and variant viruses can be differentially regulated by the
liver-specific transcription factors that bind to the proximal nuclear hormone
receptor binding site of the nucleocapsid promoter. Differential regulation of
viral replication may be important in the selection of specific viral variants as
a result of an antiviral immune response.

DOI: 10.1128/JVI.75.19.8937-8948.2001 
PMCID: PMC114462
PMID: 11533157  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

