
1. J Biol Chem. 2002 Mar 15;277(11):8775-89. Epub 2001 Dec 10.

Upstream stimulatory factors binding to an E box motif in the R region of the
bovine leukemia virus long terminal repeat stimulates viral gene expression.

Calomme C(1), Nguyen TL, de Launoit Y, Kiermer V, Droogmans L, Burny A, Van Lint 
C.

Author information: 
(1)Université Libre de Bruxelles, Institut de Biologie et de Médecine
Moléculaires, Service de Chimie Biologique, Laboratoire de Virologie Moléculaire,
Rue des Profs Jeener et Brachet 12, 6041 Gosselies, Belgium.

The bovine leukemia virus (BLV) promoter is located in its 5'-long terminal
repeat and is composed of the U3, R, and U5 regions. BLV transcription is
regulated by cis-acting elements located in the U3 region, including three 21-bp 
enhancers required for transactivation of the BLV promoter by the virus-encoded
transactivator Tax(BLV). In addition to the U3 cis-acting elements, both the R
and U5 regions contain stimulatory sequences. To date, no transcription
factor-binding site has been identified in the R region. Here sequence analysis
of this region revealed the presence of a potential E box motif (5'-CACGTG-3').
By competition and supershift gel shift assays, we demonstrated that the basic
helix-loop-helix transcription factors USF1 and USF2 specifically interacted with
this R region E box motif. Mutations abolishing upstream stimulatory factor (USF)
binding caused a reproducible decrease in basal or Tax-activated BLV
promoter-driven gene expression in transient transfection assays of B-lymphoid
cell lines. Cotransfection experiments showed that the USF1 and USF2a
transactivators were able to act through the BLV R region E box. Taken together, 
these results physically and functionally characterize a USF-binding site in the 
R region of BLV. This E box motif located downstream of the transcription start
site constitutes a new positive regulatory element involved in the
transcriptional activity of the BLV promoter and could play an important role in 
virus replication.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.M107441200 
PMID: 11741930  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

