
1. J Virol. 2003 May;77(9):5241-52.

Members of the AP-1 family, c-Jun and c-Fos, functionally interact with JC virus 
early regulatory protein large T antigen.

Kim J(1), Woolridge S, Biffi R, Borghi E, Lassak A, Ferrante P, Amini S, Khalili 
K, Safak M.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Molecular Neurovirology, Center for Neurovirology and Cancer
Biology, College of Science and Technology, Temple University, Philadelphia,
Pennsylvania 19122, USA.

The activating protein 1 (AP-1) family of regulatory proteins is characterized as
immediate-early inducible transcription factors which were shown to be activated 
by a variety of stress-related stimuli and to be involved in numerous biological 
processes, including cellular and viral gene expression, cell proliferation,
differentiation, and tumorigenesis. We have recently demonstrated the involvement
of the AP-1 family members c-Jun and c-Fos in transcriptional regulation of the
human polyomavirus, JC virus (JCV), genome. Here, we further examined their role 
in JCV gene regulation and replication through their physical and functional
interaction with JCV early regulatory protein large T antigen (T-Ag).
Transfection and replication studies indicated that c-Jun and c-Fos can
significantly diminish T-Ag-mediated JCV gene transcription and replication.
Affinity chromatography and coimmunoprecipitation assays demonstrated that c-Jun 
and T-Ag physically interact with each other. Results from band shift assays
showed that the binding efficiency of c-Jun to the AP-1 site was reduced in the
presence of T-Ag. In addition, we have mapped, through the use of a series of
deletion mutants, the regions of these proteins which are important for their
interaction. While the c-Jun interaction domain of T-Ag is localized to the
middle portion of the protein, the T-Ag interacting domain of c-Jun maps to its
basic-DNA binding region. Results of transient-transfection assays with various
c-Jun mutants and T-Ag expression constructs further confirm the specificity of
the functional interaction between c-Jun and T-Ag. Taken together, these data
demonstrate that immediate-early inducible transcription factors c-Jun and c-Fos 
physically and functionally interact with JCV major early regulatory protein
large T-Ag and that this interaction modulates JCV transcription and replication 
in glial cells.

DOI: 10.1128/jvi.77.9.5241-5252.2003 
PMCID: PMC153970
PMID: 12692226  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

