
1. Mol Cell Biol. 2004 May;24(9):3938-48.

Kaposi's sarcoma-associated herpesvirus K7 protein targets a
ubiquitin-like/ubiquitin-associated domain-containing protein to promote protein 
degradation.

Feng P(1), Scott CW, Cho NH, Nakamura H, Chung YH, Monteiro MJ, Jung JU.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Molecular Genetics and Tumor Virology Division,
New England Primate Research Center, Harvard Medical School, Southborough,
Massachusetts 01772, USA.

Pathogens exploit host machinery to establish an environment that favors their
propagation. Because of their pivotal roles in cellular physiology, protein
degradation pathways are common targets for viral proteins. Protein-linking
integrin-associated protein and cytoskeleton 1 (PLIC1), also called ubiquilin,
contains an amino-terminal ubiquitin-like (UBL) domain and a carboxy-terminal
ubiquitin-associated (UBA) domain. PLIC1 is proposed to function as a regulator
of the ubiquitination complex and proteasome machinery. Kaposi's
sarcoma-associated herpesvirus (KSHV) contains a small membrane protein, K7, that
protects cells from apoptosis induced by various stimuli. We report here that
cellular PLIC1 is a K7-interacting protein and that the central hydrophobic
region of K7 and the carboxy-terminal UBA domain of PLIC1 are responsible for
their interaction. Cellular PLIC1 formed a dimer and bound efficiently to
polyubiquitinated proteins through its carboxy-terminal UBA domain, and this
activity correlated with its ability to stabilize cellular I kappa B protein. In 
contrast, K7 interaction prevented PLIC1 from forming a dimer and binding to
polyubiquitinated proteins, leading to the rapid degradation of I kappa B.
Furthermore, K7 expression promoted efficient degradation of the p53 tumor
suppressor, resulting in inhibition of p53-mediated apoptosis. These results
indicate that KSHV K7 targets a regulator of the ubiquitin- and
proteasome-mediated degradation machinery to deregulate cellular protein
turnover, which potentially provides a favorable environment for viral
reproduction.

DOI: 10.1128/mcb.24.9.3938-3948.2004 
PMCID: PMC387769
PMID: 15082787  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

