
1. Retrovirology. 2005 Sep 28;2:59.

Amino acid residues that are important for Hyal2 function as a receptor for
jaagsiekte sheep retrovirus.

Duh FM(1), Dirks C, Lerman MI, Miller AD.

Author information: 
(1)SAIC-Frederick, National Cancer Institute, Frederick, Maryland 21702, USA.
duh@mail.ncifcrf.gov

BACKGROUND: Infection by jaagsiekte sheep retrovirus (JSRV) and by enzootic nasal
tumor virus (ENTV) depends on cell-surface expression of the virus entry
receptor, hyaluronidase 2 (Hyal2). Human Hyal2 binds the envelope (Env) proteins 
of these viruses and is functional as a receptor, but Hyal2 from mice does not
bind Env nor does it mediate entry of either virus. Here we have explored the
amino acid determinants that account for the difference in receptor function.
RESULTS: Analysis of human-mouse Hyal2 chimeric proteins showed that amino acid
differences responsible for the difference in Hyal2 receptor activity were
localized to the central third of Hyal2. Human Hyal2 mutants containing single or
double amino acid replacements with the respective mouse amino acids were
generated across this region and were assayed for activity. None of the single or
double mutation reduced the receptor activity of human Hyal2 by more than
10-fold, whereas mouse Hyal2 activity is reduced 1,000-fold from that of human
Hyal2. While the 3-dimensional structures of mammalian Hyal2 proteins are
unknown, bee venom hyaluronidase shows significant amino acid similarity to human
and mouse Hyal2 and its structure has been determined. Many mutations having the 
largest negative effects on human Hyal2 function mapped to a small region of the 
bee venom hyaluronidase close to but not overlapping the active site of the
enzyme, suggesting that this site represents the binding site for Env. Analysis
of synonymous and non-synonymous nucleotide substitutions in the coding sequences
of multiple mammalian Hyal2 proteins shows that the proteins are undergoing
strong selection for amino acid conservation. We found no evidence for positive
selection of amino acid changes that might reflect evolution of mammalian hosts
to resist JSRV or ENTV infection.
CONCLUSION: These results show that the greatly reduced receptor activity of
mouse Hyal2 in comparison to that of human Hyal2 is determined by multiple amino 
acid changes acting in concert. In particular, no one amino acid change blocks
infection. However, the most important amino acids map to a small patch on a
predicted 3-dimensional Hyal2 structure, which may represent the binding site for
Env.

DOI: 10.1186/1742-4690-2-59 
PMCID: PMC1262777
PMID: 16191204  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

