
1. Oncogene. 2006 Jan 26;25(4):633-42.

The hepatitis B virus X protein enhances AP-1 activation through interaction with
Jab1.

Tanaka Y(1), Kanai F, Ichimura T, Tateishi K, Asaoka Y, Guleng B, Jazag A, Ohta
M, Imamura J, Ikenoue T, Ijichi H, Kawabe T, Isobe T, Omata M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Gastroenterology, Graduate School of Medicine, University of
Tokyo, Japan.

Hepatitis B virus X protein (HBx) has many cellular functions and is a major
factor in hepatitis and hepatocellular carcinoma caused by HBV infection. A
proteomic approach was used to search for HBx-interacting proteins in order to
elucidate the molecular mechanism of hepatocarcinogenesis. HBx was attached to
myc and flag tags (MEF tags) and expressed in 293T cells; the protein complex
formed within the cells was purified and characterized by mass spectrometry. COP9
signalosome (CSN) subunits 3 and 4 were subsequently identified as
HBx-interacting proteins. In addition, CSN subunit 5, Jun activation
domain-binding protein 1 (Jab1), was shown to be a novel cellular target of HBx. 
In vivo and in vitro interactions between HBx and Jab1 were confirmed by standard
immunoprecipitation and GST pull-down assays. An analysis of HBx deletion
constructs showed that amino acids 30-125 of HBx were responsible for binding to 
Jab1. Confocal laser microscopy demonstrated that HBx was mainly localized in the
cytoplasm, while Jab1 was found mainly in the nucleus and partially in the
cytoplasm, and that the two proteins colocalized in the cytoplasm. The
cotransfection of HBx and Jab1 resulted in substantial activator protein 1 (AP-1)
activation and knockdown of endogenous Jab1 attenuated AP-1 activation caused by 
HBx. In addition, the coexpression of HBx and Jab1 potentiated phosphorylation of
JNK, leading to the subsequent phosphorylation of c-Jun, whereas the level of
c-Jun and JNK phosphorylation induced by HBx was decreased in Jab1 knockdown
cells. These results suggest that the interaction between HBx and Jab1 enhances
HBx-mediated AP-1 activation.

DOI: 10.1038/sj.onc.1209093 
PMID: 16247477  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

