
1. J Immunol. 2005 Dec 1;175(11):7560-7.

Cationic polypeptides are required for anti-HIV-1 activity of human vaginal
fluid.

Venkataraman N(1), Cole AL, Svoboda P, Pohl J, Cole AM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Biology and Microbiology, Biomolecular Science Center,
University of Central Florida, Orlando, FL 32816-2364, USA.

Mucosal surfaces of the vagina are the portals for heterosexual transmission of
HIV-1 and therefore play a fundamental role in the pathogenesis of primary
infection. In the search for direct biological evidence for the role of human
vaginal fluid in innate host defense, we characterized the anti-HIV-1 function of
cationic polypeptides within minimally manipulated vaginal fluid. In the current 
study we revealed that vaginal fluid confers intrinsic anti-HIV-1 properties
against both X4 and R5 strains of HIV-1 and could protect against HIV-1 infection
and reduce proviral genome integration in organotypic cultures of human
cervicovaginal tissue. The majority of this activity was contained in the
cationic polypeptide fraction, and the depletion of cationic polypeptides using a
selective cation exchange resin ablated most of the intrinsic activity against
HIV-1. By adding the cationic polypeptide fraction to depleted vaginal fluid, we 
were able to restore activity against HIV-1. Using a proteomic approach, we
identified 18 cationic polypeptides within vaginal fluid, nearly all of which are
either known antimicrobials or have other purported roles in host defense.
Interestingly, physiologic concentrations of 13 of the cationic polypeptides were
not active alone against HIV-1, yet in concert they partially restored the
anti-HIV-1 activity of cation-depleted vaginal fluid. These results suggest that 
synergism between cationic polypeptides is complex, and full anti-HIV-1 activity 
probably involves the aggregate of the cationic peptides and proteins in vaginal 
fluid.

DOI: 10.4049/jimmunol.175.11.7560 
PMID: 16301665  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

