
1. J Virol. 2006 Apr;80(7):3378-85.

A putative thiamine transport protein is a receptor for feline leukemia virus
subgroup A.

Mendoza R(1), Anderson MM, Overbaugh J.

Author information: 
(1)Program in Molecular and Cellular Biology, University of Washington, Seattle, 
USA.

Feline leukemia virus (FeLV) is a horizontally transmitted virus that causes a
variety of proliferative and immunosuppressive diseases in cats. There are four
subgroups of FeLV, A, B, C, and T, each of which has a distinct receptor
requirement. The receptors for all but the FeLV-A subgroup have been defined
previously. Here, we report the identification of the cellular receptor for
FeLV-A, which is the most transmissible form of FeLV. The receptor cDNA was
isolated using a gene transfer approach, which involved introducing sequences
from a feline cell line permissive to FeLV-A into a murine cell line that was not
permissive. The feline cDNA identified by this method was approximately 3.5 kb,
and included an open reading frame predicted to encode a protein of 490 amino
acids. This feline cDNA conferred susceptibility to FeLV-A when reintroduced into
nonpermissive cells, but it did not render these cells permissive to any other
FeLV subgroup. Moreover, these cells specifically bound FeLV-A-pseudotyped virus 
particles, indicating that the cDNA encodes a binding receptor for FeLV-A. The
feline cDNA shares approximately 93% amino acid sequence identity with the human 
thiamine transport protein 1 (THTR1). The human THTR1 receptor was also
functional as a receptor for FeLV-A, albeit with reduced efficiency compared to
the feline orthologue. On the basis of these data, which strongly suggest the
feline protein is the orthologue of human THTR1, we have named the feline
receptor feTHTR1. Identification of this receptor will allow more detailed
studies of the early events in FeLV transmission and may provide insights into
FeLV pathogenesis.

DOI: 10.1128/JVI.80.7.3378-3385.2006 
PMCID: PMC1440375
PMID: 16537605  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

