
1. J Virol. 2006 Oct;80(20):10128-38.

Differential enhancement of dengue virus immune complex infectivity mediated by
signaling-competent and signaling-incompetent human Fcgamma RIA (CD64) or
FcgammaRIIA (CD32).

Rodrigo WW(1), Jin X, Blackley SD, Rose RC, Schlesinger JJ.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Infectious Diseases, Department of Medicine, University of
Rochester School of Medicine and Dentistry, Box 689, 601 Crittenden Avenue,
Rochester, NY 14642, USA.

Fcgamma receptor (FcgammaR)-mediated entry of infectious dengue virus immune
complexes into monocytes/macrophages is hypothesized to be a key event in the
pathogenesis of complicated dengue fever. FcgammaRIA (CD64) and FcgammaRIIA
(CD32), which predominate on the surface of such dengue virus-permissive cells,
were compared for their influence on the infectivity of dengue 2 virus immune
complexes formed with human dengue virus antibodies. A signaling immunoreceptor
tyrosine-based activation motif (ITAM) incorporated into the accessory
gamma-chain subunit that associates with FcgammaRIA and constitutively in
FcgammaRIIA is required for phagocytosis mediated by these receptors. To
determine whether FcgammaRIA and FcgammaRIIA activation functions are also
required for internalization of infectious dengue virus immune complexes, we
generated native and signaling-incompetent versions of each receptor by
site-directed mutagenesis of ITAM tyrosine residues. Plasmids designed to express
these receptors were transfected into COS-7 cells, and dengue virus replication
was measured by plaque assay and flow cytometry. We found that both receptors
mediated enhanced dengue virus immune complex infectivity but that FcgammaRIIA
appeared to do so far more effectively. Abrogation of FcgammaRIA signaling
competency, either by expression without gamma-chain or by coexpression with
gamma-chain mutants, was associated with significant impairment of phagocytosis
and of dengue virus immune complex infectivity. Abrogation of FcgammaRIIA
signaling competency was also associated with equally impaired phagocytosis but
had no discernible effect on dengue virus immune complex infectivity. These
findings point to fundamental differences between FcgammaRIA and FcgammaRIIA with
respect to their immune-enhancing capabilities and suggest that different
mechanisms of dengue virus immune complex internalization may operate between
these FcgammaRs.

DOI: 10.1128/JVI.00792-06 
PMCID: PMC1617290
PMID: 17005690  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

