
1. J Virol. 2007 Apr;81(8):4226-34. Epub 2007 Jan 31.

Arginine methylation of the human immunodeficiency virus type 1 Tat protein by
PRMT6 negatively affects Tat Interactions with both cyclin T1 and the Tat
transactivation region.

Xie B(1), Invernizzi CF, Richard S, Wainberg MA.

Author information: 
(1)McGill University AIDS Centre, Department of Medicine, Terry Fox Molecular
Oncology Group, Lady Davis Institute, St. Mortimer B. Davis Jewish General
Hospital, 3755 Côte-Ste-Catherine Rd., Montréal, Québec H3T 1E2, Canada.

Arginine methylation has been shown to regulate signal transduction, protein
subcellular localization, gene transcription, and protein-protein interactions
that ultimately alter gene expression. Although the role of cellular protein
arginine methyltransferases (PRMT) in viral gene expression is largely unknown,
we recently showed that the Tat protein of human immunodeficiency virus type 1
(HIV-1) is a substrate for one such enzyme, termed PRMT6. However, the mechanism 
by which arginine methylation impairs the transactivation potential of Tat and
the sites of arginine methylation within Tat remain obscure. We now show that Tat
is a specific in vitro and in vivo substrate of PRMT6 which targets the Tat R52
and R53 residues for arginine methylation. Such Tat methylation led to decreased 
interaction with the Tat transactivation region (TAR) of viral RNA. Furthermore, 
arginine methylation of Tat negatively affected Tat-TAR-cyclin T1 ternary complex
formation and diminished cyclin T1-dependent Tat transcriptional activation.
Overexpression of wild-type PRMT6, but not a methylase-inactive PRMT6 mutant,
reduced levels of Tat transactivation of HIV-1 long terminal repeat
chloramphenicol acetyltransferase and luciferase reporter plasmids in a
dose-dependent manner. In cell-based assays, knockdown of PRMT6 resulted in
increased HIV-1 production and faster viral replication. Thus, PRMT6 can
compromise Tat transcriptional activation and may represent a form of innate
cellular immunity in regard to HIV-1 replication. Finding a way of inhibiting or 
stimulating PRMT6 activity might help to drive quiescently infected cells out of 
latency or combat HIV-1 replication, respectively.

DOI: 10.1128/JVI.01888-06 
PMCID: PMC1866113
PMID: 17267505  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

