
1. J Virol. 2007 May;81(10):5046-57. Epub 2007 Feb 28.

Development of Sindbis viruses encoding nsP2/GFP chimeric proteins and their
application for studying nsP2 functioning.

Atasheva S(1), Gorchakov R, English R, Frolov I, Frolova E.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, University of Texas Medical Branch,
Galveston, TX 77555-1072, USA.

Sindbis virus (SINV) is one of almost 30 currently known alphaviruses. In
infected cells, it produces only a few proteins that function in virus
replication and interfere with the development of the antiviral response. One of 
the viral nonstructural proteins, nsP2, not only exhibits protease and RNA
helicase activities that are directly involved in viral RNA replication but also 
plays critical roles in the development of transcriptional and translational
shutoffs in the SINV-infected cells. These multiple activities of nsP2 complicate
investigations of this protein's functions and further understanding of its
structure. Using a transposon-based approach, we generated a cDNA library of SINV
genomes with a green fluorescent protein (GFP) gene randomly inserted into nsP2
and identified a number of sites that can be used for GFP cloning without a
strong effect on virus replication. Recombinant SIN viruses encoding nsP2/GFP
chimeric protein were capable of growth in tissue culture and interfering with
cellular functions. SINV, expressing GFP in the nsP2, was used to isolate
nsP2-specific protein complexes formed in the cytoplasm of the infected cells.
These complexes contained viral nsPs, all of the cellular proteins that we
previously coisolated with SINV nsP3, and some additional protein factors that
were not found before in detectable concentrations. The random insertion
library-based approach, followed by the selection of the viable variants
expressing heterologous proteins, can be applied for mapping the domain structure
of the viral nonstructural and structural proteins, cloning of peptide tags for
isolation of the protein-specific complexes, and studying their formation by
using live-cell imaging. This approach may also be applicable to presentation of 
additional antigens and retargeting of viruses to new receptors.

DOI: 10.1128/JVI.02746-06 
PMCID: PMC1900196
PMID: 17329335  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

