
1. J Virol. 2009 Aug;83(16):8012-20. doi: 10.1128/JVI.00038-09. Epub 2009 Jun 10.

The tight junction-associated protein occludin is required for a postbinding step
in hepatitis C virus entry and infection.

Benedicto I(1), Molina-Jiménez F, Bartosch B, Cosset FL, Lavillette D, Prieto J, 
Moreno-Otero R, Valenzuela-Fernández A, Aldabe R, López-Cabrera M, Majano PL.

Author information: 
(1)Hospital Universitario de la Princesa, Madrid, Spain.

The precise mechanisms regulating hepatitis C virus (HCV) entry into hepatic
cells remain unknown. However, several cell surface proteins have been identified
as entry factors for this virus. Of these molecules, claudin-1, a tight junction 
(TJ) component, is considered a coreceptor required for HCV entry. Recently, we
have demonstrated that HCV envelope glycoproteins (HCVgp) promote structural and 
functional TJ alterations. Additionally, we have shown that the intracellular
interaction between viral E2 glycoprotein and occludin, another TJ-associated
protein, could be the cause of the mislocalization of TJ proteins. Herein we
demonstrated, by using cell culture-derived HCV particles (HCVcc), that
interference of occludin expression markedly reduced HCV infection. Furthermore, 
our results with HCV pseudotyped particles indicated that occludin, but not other
TJ-associated proteins, such as junctional adhesion molecule A or zonula
occludens protein 1, was required for HCV entry. Using HCVcc, we demonstrated
that occludin did not play an essential role in the initial attachment of HCV to 
target cells. Surface protein labeling experiments showed that both expression
levels and cell surface localization of HCV (co)receptors CD81, scavenger
receptor class B type I, and claudin-1 were not affected upon occludin knockdown.
In addition, immunofluorescence confocal analysis showed that occludin
interference did not affect subcellular distribution of the HCV (co)receptors
analyzed. However, HCVgp fusion-associated events were altered after occludin
silencing. In summary, we propose that occludin plays an essential role in HCV
infection and probably affects late entry events. This observation may provide
new insights into HCV infection and related pathogenesis.

DOI: 10.1128/JVI.00038-09 
PMCID: PMC2715771
PMID: 19515778  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

