
1. J Virol. 2009 Nov;83(21):10922-30. doi: 10.1128/JVI.01312-09. Epub 2009 Aug 12.

Low pH-triggered beta-propeller switch of the low-density lipoprotein receptor
assists rhinovirus infection.

Konecsni T(1), Berka U, Pickl-Herk A, Bilek G, Khan AG, Gajdzig L, Fuchs R, Blaas
D.

Author information: 
(1)Max F. Perutz Laboratories, University Department at the Vienna Biocenter,
Medical University of Vienna, Vienna, Austria.

Minor group human rhinoviruses (HRVs) bind three members of the low-density
lipoprotein receptor (LDLR) family: LDLR proper, very-LDLR (VLDLR) and
LDLR-related protein (LRP). Whereas ICAM-1, the receptor of major group HRVs
actively contributes to viral uncoating, LDLRs are rather considered passive
vehicles for cargo delivery to the low-pH environment of endosomes. Since the
Tyr-Trp-Thr-Asp beta-propeller domain of LDLR has been shown to be involved in
the dissociation of bound LDL via intramolecular competition at low pH, we
studied whether it also plays a role in HRV infection. Human cell lines deficient
in LDLR family proteins are not available. Therefore, we used CHO-ldla7 cells
that lack endogenous LDLR. These were stably transfected to express either
wild-type (wt) human LDLR or a mutant with a deletion of the beta-propeller. When
HRV2 was attached to the propeller-negative LDLR, a lower pH was required for
conversion to subviral particles than when attached to wt LDLR. This indicates
that high-avidity receptor binding maintains the virus in its native
conformation. HRV2 internalization directed the mutant LDLR but not wt LDLR to
lysosomes, resulting in reduced plasma membrane expression of propeller-negative 
LDLR. Infection assays using a CHO-adapted HRV2 variant showed a delay in
intracellular viral conversion and de novo viral synthesis in cells expressing
the truncated LDLR. Our data indicate that the beta-propeller attenuates the
virus-stabilizing effect of LDLR binding and thereby facilitates RNA release from
endosomes, resulting in the enhancement of infection. This is a nice example of a
virus exploiting high-avidity multimodule receptor binding with an intrinsic
release mechanism.

DOI: 10.1128/JVI.01312-09 
PMCID: PMC2772763
PMID: 19706701  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

