
1. J Virol. 2010 May;84(10):4969-78. doi: 10.1128/JVI.02623-09. Epub 2010 Mar 3.

Binding site on the transferrin receptor for the parvovirus capsid and effects of
altered affinity on cell uptake and infection.

Goodman LB(1), Lyi SM, Johnson NC, Cifuente JO, Hafenstein SL, Parrish CR.

Author information: 
(1)Baker Institute for Animal Health, Department of Microbiology and Immunology, 
College of Veterinary Medicine, Cornell University, Ithaca NY 14853, USA.

Canine parvovirus (CPV) and its relative feline panleukopenia virus (FPV) bind
the transferrin receptor type 1 (TfR) to infect their host cells but show
differences in the interactions with the feline and canine TfRs that determine
viral host range and tissue tropism. We changed apical and protease-like domain
residues by introducing point mutations and adding or removing glycosylation
signals, and we then examined the interactions of those mutant TfRs with the
capsids. Most substitutions had little effect on virus binding and uptake.
However, mutations of several sites in the apical domain of the receptor either
prevented binding to the capsids or reduced the affinity of receptor binding to
various degrees. Glycans within the virus binding face of the apical domain also 
controlled capsid binding. CPV, but not the related feline parvovirus, could use 
receptors containing a canine TfR-specific glycosylation to mediate efficient
infection, while addition of other N-linked glycosylation sites into the virus
binding face of the feline apical domain reduced or eliminated both binding and
infection. Replacement of critical feline TfR residue 221 with every amino acid
had effects on binding and infection which were significantly associated with the
biochemical properties of the residue replaced. Receptors with reduced affinities
mostly showed proportional changes in their ability to mediate infection. Testing
feline TfR variants for their binding and uptake patterns in cells showed that
low-affinity versions bound fewer capsids and also differed in attachment to the 
cell surface and filopodia, but transport to the perinuclear endosome was
similar.

DOI: 10.1128/JVI.02623-09 
PMCID: PMC2863798
PMID: 20200243  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

