
1. Virol J. 2010 Mar 8;7:56. doi: 10.1186/1743-422X-7-56.

MNF, an ankyrin repeat protein of myxoma virus, is part of a native cellular SCF 
complex during viral infection.

Blanié S(1), Gelfi J, Bertagnoli S, Camus-Bouclainville C.

Author information: 
(1)INRA, UMR 1225 Interactions Hôtes - Agents Pathogènes F-31076 Toulouse,
France.

Myxoma virus (MYXV), a member of the Poxviridae family, is the agent responsible 
for myxomatosis, a fatal disease in the European rabbit (Oryctolagus cuniculus). 
Like all poxviruses, MYXV is known for encoding multiple proteins that regulate
cellular signaling pathways. Among them, four proteins share the same ANK/PRANC
structure: M148R, M149R, MNF (Myxoma Nuclear factor) and M-T5, all of them
described as virulence factors. This family of poxvirus proteins, recently
identified, has drawn considerable attention for its potential role in modulating
the host ubiquitin-proteasome system during viral infection. To date, many
members of this novel protein family have been shown to interact with SCF
components, in vitro. Here, we focus on MNF gene, which has been shown to express
a nuclear protein presenting nine ANK repeats, one of which has been identified
as a nuclear localization signal. In transfection, MNF has been shown to
colocalise with the transcription factor NF-kappaB in the nucleus of
TNFalpha-stimulated cells. Functionally, MNF is a critical virulence factor since
its deletion generates an almost apathogenic virus. In this study, to pursue the 
investigation of proteins interacting with MNF and of its mechanism of action, we
engineered a recombinant MYXV expressing a GFP-linked MNF under the control of
MNF native promoter. Infection of rabbits with MYXV-GFPMNF recombinant virus
provided the evidence that the GFP fusion does not disturb the main function of
MNF. Hence, cells were infected with MYXV-GFPMNF and immunoprecipitation of the
GFPMNF fusion protein was performed to identify MNF's partners. For the first
time, endogenous components of SCF (Cullin-1 and Skp1) were co-precipitated with 
an ANK myxoma virus protein, expressed in an infectious context, and without
over-expression of any protein.

DOI: 10.1186/1743-422X-7-56 
PMCID: PMC2842262
PMID: 20211013  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

