
1. J Virol. 2011 Sep;85(18):9588-98. doi: 10.1128/JVI.05064-11. Epub 2011 Jul 13.

Human immunodeficiency virus rev-binding protein is essential for influenza a
virus replication and promotes genome trafficking in late-stage infection.

Eisfeld AJ(1), Neumann G, Kawaoka Y.

Author information: 
(1)Influenza Research Institute, University of Wisconsin-Madison, 575 Science
Drive, Madison, WI 53711, USA. aefenney@vetmed.wisc.edu

Influenza A virus uses cellular protein transport systems (e.g., CRM1-mediated
nuclear export and Rab11-dependent recycling endosomes) for genome trafficking
from the nucleus to the plasma membrane, where new virions are assembled.
However, the detailed mechanisms of these events have not been completely
resolved, and additional cellular factors are probably required. Here, we
investigated the role of the cellular human immunodeficiency virus (HIV)
Rev-binding protein (HRB), which interacts with influenza virus nuclear export
protein (NEP), during the influenza virus life cycle. By using small interfering 
RNAs (siRNAs) and overexpression of a dominant negative HRB protein fragment, we 
show that cells lacking functional HRB have significantly reduced production of
influenza virus progeny and that this defect results from impaired viral
ribonucleoprotein (vRNP) delivery to the plasma membrane in late-stage infection.
Since HRB colocalizes with influenza vRNPs early after their delivery to the
cytoplasm, it may mediate a connection between the nucleocytoplasmic transport
machinery and the endosomal system, thus facilitating the transfer of vRNPs from 
nuclear export to cytoplasmic trafficking complexes. We also found an association
between NEP and HRB in the perinuclear region, suggesting that NEP may contribute
to this process. Our results identify HRB as a second endosomal factor with a
crucial role in influenza virus genome trafficking, suggest cooperation between
unique endosomal compartments in the late steps of the influenza virus life
cycle, and provide a common link between the cytoplasmic trafficking mechanisms
of influenza virus and HIV.

DOI: 10.1128/JVI.05064-11 
PMCID: PMC3165756
PMID: 21752912  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

