
1. PLoS One. 2012;7(7):e40662. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0040662. Epub 2012 Jul 10.

Localization and sub-cellular shuttling of HTLV-1 tax with the miRNA machinery.

Van Duyne R(1), Guendel I, Klase Z, Narayanan A, Coley W, Jaworski E, Roman J,
Popratiloff A, Mahieux R, Kehn-Hall K, Kashanchi F.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular and Microbiology, National Center for Biodefense &
Infectious Diseases, George Mason University, Manassas, Virginia, United States
of America.

The innate ability of the human cell to silence endogenous retroviruses through
RNA sequences encoding microRNAs, suggests that the cellular RNAi machinery is a 
major means by which the host mounts a defense response against present day
retroviruses. Indeed, cellular miRNAs target and hybridize to specific sequences 
of both HTLV-1 and HIV-1 viral transcripts. However, much like the variety of
host immune responses to retroviral infection, the virus itself contains
mechanisms that assist in the evasion of viral inhibition through control of the 
cellular RNAi pathway. Retroviruses can hijack both the enzymatic and catalytic
components of the RNAi pathway, in some cases to produce novel viral miRNAs that 
can either assist in active viral infection or promote a latent state. Here, we
show that HTLV-1 Tax contributes to the dysregulation of the RNAi pathway by
altering the expression of key components of this pathway. A survey of uninfected
and HTLV-1 infected cells revealed that Drosha protein is present at lower levels
in all HTLV-1 infected cell lines and in infected primary cells, while other
components such as DGCR8 were not dramatically altered. We show colocalization of
Tax and Drosha in the nucleus in vitro as well as coimmunoprecipitation in the
presence of proteasome inhibitors, indicating that Tax interacts with Drosha and 
may target it to specific areas of the cell, namely, the proteasome. In the
presence of Tax we observed a prevention of primary miRNA cleavage by Drosha.
Finally, the changes in cellular miRNA expression in HTLV-1 infected cells can be
mimicked by the add back of Drosha or the addition of antagomiRs against the
cellular miRNAs which are downregulated by the virus.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0040662 
PMCID: PMC3393700
PMID: 22808228  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

