
1. PLoS Pathog. 2012;8(8):e1002852. doi: 10.1371/journal.ppat.1002852. Epub 2012 Aug
9.

HSV-1 genome subnuclear positioning and associations with host-cell PML-NBs and
centromeres regulate LAT locus transcription during latency in neurons.

Catez F(1), Picard C, Held K, Gross S, Rousseau A, Theil D, Sawtell N, Labetoulle
M, Lomonte P.

Author information: 
(1)Virus and Centromere team, Centre de Génétique et de Physiologie Moléculaire
et Cellulaire CNRS, UMR5534, Villeurbanne, France.

Major human pathologies are caused by nuclear replicative viruses establishing
life-long latent infection in their host. During latency the genomes of these
viruses are intimately interacting with the cell nucleus environment. A hallmark 
of herpes simplex virus type 1 (HSV-1) latency establishment is the shutdown of
lytic genes expression and the concomitant induction of the latency associated
(LAT) transcripts. Although the setting up and the maintenance of the latent
genetic program is most likely dependent on a subtle interplay between viral and 
nuclear factors, this remains uninvestigated. Combining the use of in situ
fluorescent-based approaches and high-resolution microscopic analysis, we show
that HSV-1 genomes adopt specific nuclear patterns in sensory neurons of latently
infected mice (28 days post-inoculation, d.p.i.). Latent HSV-1 genomes display
two major patterns, called "Single" and "Multiple", which associate with
centromeres, and with promyelocytic leukemia nuclear bodies (PML-NBs) as viral
DNA-containing PML-NBs (DCP-NBs). 3D-image reconstruction of DCP-NBs shows that
PML forms a shell around viral genomes and associated Daxx and ATRX, two PML
partners within PML-NBs. During latency establishment (6 d.p.i.), infected mouse 
TGs display, at the level of the whole TG and in individual cells, a substantial 
increase of PML amount consistent with the interferon-mediated antiviral role of 
PML. "Single" and "Multiple" patterns are reminiscent of low and high-viral
genome copy-containing neurons. We show that LAT expression is significantly
favored within the "Multiple" pattern, which underlines a heterogeneity of LAT
expression dependent on the viral genome copy number, pattern acquisition, and
association with nuclear domains. Infection of PML-knockout mice demonstrates
that PML/PML-NBs are involved in virus nuclear pattern acquisition, and
negatively regulate the expression of the LAT. This study demonstrates that
nuclear domains including PML-NBs and centromeres are functionally involved in
the control of HSV-1 latency, and represent a key level of host/virus
interaction.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.ppat.1002852 
PMCID: PMC3415458
PMID: 22912575  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

