
1. PLoS Pathog. 2012;8(8):e1002845. doi: 10.1371/journal.ppat.1002845. Epub 2012 Aug
16.

Identification and targeting of an interaction between a tyrosine motif within
hepatitis C virus core protein and AP2M1 essential for viral assembly.

Neveu G(1), Barouch-Bentov R, Ziv-Av A, Gerber D, Jacob Y, Einav S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, Division of Infectious Diseases and Geographic
Medicine, and Department of Microbiology and Immunology, Stanford University
School of Medicine, Stanford, California, United States of America.

Novel therapies are urgently needed against hepatitis C virus infection (HCV), a 
major global health problem. The current model of infectious virus production
suggests that HCV virions are assembled on or near the surface of lipid droplets,
acquire their envelope at the ER, and egress through the secretory pathway. The
mechanisms of HCV assembly and particularly the role of viral-host
protein-protein interactions in mediating this process are, however, poorly
understood. We identified a conserved heretofore unrecognized YXXΦ motif (Φ is a 
bulky hydrophobic residue) within the core protein. This motif is homologous to
sorting signals within host cargo proteins known to mediate binding of AP2M1, the
μ subunit of clathrin adaptor protein complex 2 (AP-2), and intracellular
trafficking. Using microfluidics affinity analysis, protein-fragment
complementation assays, and co-immunoprecipitations in infected cells, we show
that this motif mediates core binding to AP2M1. YXXΦ mutations, silencing AP2M1
expression or overexpressing a dominant negative AP2M1 mutant had no effect on
HCV RNA replication, however, they dramatically inhibited intra- and
extracellular infectivity, consistent with a defect in viral assembly.
Quantitative confocal immunofluorescence analysis revealed that core's YXXΦ motif
mediates recruitment of AP2M1 to lipid droplets and that the observed defect in
HCV assembly following disruption of core-AP2M1 binding correlates with
accumulation of core on lipid droplets, reduced core colocalization with E2 and
reduced core localization to trans-Golgi network (TGN), the presumed site of
viral particles maturation. Furthermore, AAK1 and GAK, serine/threonine kinases
known to stimulate binding of AP2M1 to host cargo proteins, regulate core-AP2M1
binding and are essential for HCV assembly. Last, approved anti-cancer drugs that
inhibit AAK1 or GAK not only disrupt core-AP2M1 binding, but also significantly
inhibit HCV assembly and infectious virus production. These results validate
viral-host interactions essential for HCV assembly and yield compounds for
pharmaceutical development.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.ppat.1002845 
PMCID: PMC3420927
PMID: 22916011  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

