
1. Dig Liver Dis. 2013 Dec;45(12):1041-8. doi: 10.1016/j.dld.2013.06.004. Epub 2013 
Jul 26.

Hepatitis B virus X protein co-activates pregnane X receptor to induce the
cytochrome P450 3A4 enzyme, a potential implication in hepatocarcinogenesis.

Niu Y(1), Wu Z, Shen Q, Song J, Luo Q, You H, Shi G, Qin W.

Author information: 
(1)State Key Laboratory of Oncogenes and Related Genes, Shanghai Cancer
Institute, Renji Hospital, Shanghai Jiao Tong University School of Medicine,
Shanghai, China; Department of Pharmacology, Shantou University Medical College, 
Guangdong, China. Electronic address: ydniu@126.com.

BACKGROUND: Hepatitis B virus X protein is a key regulator of
hepatocarcinogenesis. The pregnane X receptor is a xenobiotic nuclear receptor
that plays a role in the regulation of drug-metabolizing enzymes including the
cytochrome P450 3A4, an enzyme important for the bioactivation of the liver
carcinogen aflatoxin B1.
AIMS: To identify novel host factor that interacts with hepatitis B virus X
protein and the functional interaction between hepatitis B virus X protein and
pregnane X receptor in hepatocarcinogenesis.
METHODS: Co-immunoprecipitation, glutathione S-transferase pull-down, and
chromatin immunoprecipitation were utilized to assess the interaction between
hepatitis B virus X protein and pregnane X receptor. The functional relevance of 
hepatitis B virus X protein-pregnane X receptor interaction was investigated in
cell cultures and hepatocellular carcinoma samples.
RESULTS: We observed that hepatitis B virus X protein and pregnane X receptor
co-localize in hepatic cells. Pregnane X receptor interacted with hepatitis B
virus X protein via the ligand-binding domain of pregnane X receptor.
Functionally, hepatitis B virus X protein increased the transcriptional activity 
of pregnane X receptor. Pregnane X receptor was able to recruit hepatitis B virus
X protein to the CYP3A4 gene promoter. In clinic samples, the expression of
pregnane X receptor was high in hepatitis B virus-associated liver cirrhosis and 
stage I hepatocellular carcinoma, but low in state II and stage III
hepatocellular carcinoma.
CONCLUSION: We revealed a novel function of hepatitis B virus X protein in
co-activating pregnane X receptor. The increased expression of pregnane X
receptor and its target gene CYP3A4 are potential biomarkers for the early stage 
of hepatitis B virus-associated hepatocarcinogenesis.

Copyright © 2013 Editrice Gastroenterologica Italiana S.r.l. Published by
Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.dld.2013.06.004 
PMID: 23891548  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

