
1. J Virol. 2014 May;88(10):5559-77. doi: 10.1128/JVI.03099-13. Epub 2014 Mar 5.

Analysis of host gene expression changes reveals distinct roles for the
cytoplasmic domain of the Epstein-Barr virus receptor/CD21 in B-cell maturation, 
activation, and initiation of virus infection.

Arredouani MS(1), Bhasin MK, Sage DR, Dunn LK, Gill MB, Agnani D, Libermann TA,
Fingeroth JD.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Surgery, Beth Israel Deaconess Medical Center and Harvard
Medical School, Boston, Massachusetts, USA.

Epstein-Barr virus (EBV) attachment to human CD21 on the B-cell surface initiates
infection. Whether CD21 is a simple tether or conveys vital information to the
cell interior for production of host factors that promote infection of primary B 
cells is controversial, as the cytoplasmic fragment of CD21 is short, though
highly conserved. The ubiquity of CD21 on normal B cells, the diversity of this
population, and the well-known resistance of primary B cells to gene transfer
technologies have all impeded resolution of this question. To uncover the role(s)
of the CD21 cytoplasmic domain during infection initiation, the full-length
receptor (CD21=CR), a mutant lacking the entire cytoplasmic tail (CT), and a
control vector (NEO) were stably expressed in two pre-B-cell lines that lack
endogenous receptor. Genome-wide transcriptional analysis demonstrated that
stable CD21 surface expression alone (either CR or CT) produced multiple
independent changes in gene expression, though both dramatically decreased class 
I melanoma-associated antigen (MAGE) family RNAs and upregulated genes associated
with B-cell differentiation (e.g., C2TA, HLA-II, IL21R, MIC2, CD48, and
PTPRCAP/CD45-associated protein). Temporal analysis spanning 72 h revealed that
not only CR- but also CT-expressing lines initiated latency. In spite of this,
the number and spectrum of transcripts altered in CR- compared with CT-bearing
lines at 1 h after infection further diverged. Differential modulation of
immediate early cellular transcripts (e.g., c-Jun and multiple histones), both
novel and previously linked to CD21-initiated signaling, as well as distinct
results from pathway analyses support a separate role for the cytoplasmic domain 
in initiation of intracellular signals.IMPORTANCE: Membrane proteins that mediate
virus attachment tether virus particles to the cell surface, initiating
infection. In addition, upon virus interaction such proteins may transmit signals
to the interior of the cell that support subsequent steps in the infection
process. Here we show that expression of the Epstein-Barr virus B-cell attachment
receptor, CD21, in B cells that lack this receptor results in significant changes
in gene expression, both before and rapidly following EBV-CD21 interaction. These
changes translate into major signaling pathway alterations that are predicted to 
support stable infection.

DOI: 10.1128/JVI.03099-13 
PMCID: PMC4019091
PMID: 24600013  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

