
1. J Virol. 2015 Jan;89(1):615-25. doi: 10.1128/JVI.02174-14. Epub 2014 Oct 22.

Autophagy restricts HIV-1 infection by selectively degrading Tat in CD4+ T
lymphocytes.

Sagnier S(1), Daussy CF(1), Borel S(1), Robert-Hebmann V(1), Faure M(2), Blanchet
FP(1), Beaumelle B(1), Biard-Piechaczyk M(1), Espert L(3).

Author information: 
(1)CPBS, Université de Montpellier, UMR 5236 CNRS, Montpellier, France.
(2)CIRI, International Center for Infectiology Research, Université de Lyon,
Lyon, France INSERM U1111, Lyon, France Ecole Normale Supérieure de Lyon, Lyon,
France Université Lyon 1, Centre International de Recherche en Infectiologie,
Lyon, France CNRS, UMR 5308, Lyon, France.
(3)CPBS, Université de Montpellier, UMR 5236 CNRS, Montpellier, France
lucile.espert@cpbs.cnrs.fr.

Autophagy is a ubiquitous mechanism involved in the lysosomal-mediated
degradation of cellular components when they are engulfed in vacuoles called
autophagosomes. Autophagy is also recognized as an important regulator of the
innate and adaptive immune responses against numerous pathogens, which have,
therefore, developed strategies to block or use the autophagy machinery to their 
own benefit. Upon human immunodeficiency virus type 1 (HIV-1) infection, viral
envelope (Env) glycoproteins induce autophagy-dependent apoptosis of uninfected
bystander CD4(+) T lymphocytes, a mechanism likely contributing to the loss of
CD4(+) T cells. In contrast, in productively infected CD4(+) T cells, HIV-1 is
able to block Env-induced autophagy in order to avoid its antiviral effect. To
date, nothing is known about how autophagy restricts HIV-1 infection in CD4(+) T 
lymphocytes. Here, we report that autophagy selectively degrades the HIV-1
transactivator Tat, a protein essential for viral transcription and virion
production. We demonstrated that this selective autophagy-mediated degradation of
Tat relies on its ubiquitin-independent interaction with the p62/SQSTM1 adaptor. 
Taken together, our results provide evidence that the anti-HIV effect of
autophagy is specifically due to the degradation of the viral transactivator Tat 
but that this process is rapidly counteracted by the virus to favor its
replication and spread.IMPORTANCE: Autophagy is recognized as one of the most
ancient and conserved mechanisms of cellular defense against invading pathogens. 
Cross talk between HIV-1 and autophagy has been demonstrated depending on the
virally challenged cell type, and HIV-1 has evolved strategies to block this
process to replicate efficiently. However, the mechanisms by which autophagy
restricts HIV-1 infection remain to be elucidated. Here, we report that the HIV-1
transactivator Tat, a protein essential for viral replication, is specifically
degraded by autophagy in CD4(+) T lymphocytes. Both Tat present in infected cells
and incoming Tat secreted from infected cells are targeted for autophagy
degradation through a ubiquitin-independent interaction with the autophagy
receptor p62/SQSTM1. This study is the first to demonstrate that selective
autophagy can be an antiviral process by degrading a viral transactivator. In
addition, the results could help in the design of new therapies against HIV-1 by 
specifically targeting this mechanism.

Copyright © 2015, American Society for Microbiology. All Rights Reserved.

DOI: 10.1128/JVI.02174-14 
PMCID: PMC4301118
PMID: 25339774  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

