
1. Virus Res. 2015 Jan 2;195:236-45. doi: 10.1016/j.virusres.2014.10.025. Epub 2014 
Nov 1.

Hepatitis B virus X protein increases the IL-1β-induced NF-κB activation via
interaction with evolutionarily conserved signaling intermediate in Toll pathways
(ECSIT).

Chen WN(1), Liu LL(2), Jiao BY(2), Lin WS(2), Lin XJ(3), Lin X(4).

Author information: 
(1)Key Laboratory of Ministry of Education for Gastrointestinal Cancer, School of
Basic Medical Sciences, Fujian Medical University, Fuzhou, China; Key Laboratory 
of Tumor Microbiology, Department of Medical Microbiology, Fujian Medical
University, Fuzhou, China.
(2)Key Laboratory of Ministry of Education for Gastrointestinal Cancer, School of
Basic Medical Sciences, Fujian Medical University, Fuzhou, China.
(3)Department of Medicine and UC San Diego Moores Cancer Center, University of
California-San Diego, CA, USA. Electronic address: xlin@ucsd.edu.
(4)Key Laboratory of Ministry of Education for Gastrointestinal Cancer, School of
Basic Medical Sciences, Fujian Medical University, Fuzhou, China; Key Laboratory 
of Tumor Microbiology, Department of Medical Microbiology, Fujian Medical
University, Fuzhou, China. Electronic address: linxu@mail.fjmu.edu.cn.

Hepatitis B virus X protein (HBx) transactivates multiple transcription factors
including nuclear factor-kappa B (NF-κB) that regulates inflammatory-related
genes. However, the regulatory mechanism of HBx in NF-κB activation remains
largely unknown. This study reports that HBx augments the interleukin-1β
(IL-1β)-induced NF-κB activation via interaction with a Toll-like receptor (TLR) 
adapter protein, ECSIT (evolutionarily conserved signaling intermediate in Toll
pathways). GST pull-down and co-immunoprecipitation analyses showed that HBx
interacted with ECSIT. Deletion analysis of HBx in a CytoTrap two-hybrid system
revealed that the interaction region of HBx for ECSIT was attributed to aa 51-80.
Co-transfection of HBx and ECSIT in IL-1β-stimulated cells appeared to activate
IKK and IκB signaling pathway as phosphorylation of both IKK α/β and IκBα was
increased whereas knockdown of ECSIT or HBxΔ51-80 mutant attenuated the
phosphorylation. As a consequence of IκBα degradation, NF-κB was activated as
evidenced by increases in NF-κB transcriptional activity and the nuclear
translocation of p65 and p50 that resulted in the induction of IL-10. In
contrast, knockdown of ECSIT by siRNA or treatment with an NF-κB selective
inhibitor (helenalin) abolished the NF-κB activation and IL-10 expression. We
conclude that ECSIT appears to be a novel HBx-interacting signal molecule and
their interaction is mechanistically important in IL-1β induction of NF-κB
activation.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.virusres.2014.10.025 
PMID: 25449573  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

