
1. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 1996 Mar 5;93(5):2089-94.

Human immunodeficiency virus type 1 and 2 Tat proteins specifically interact with
RNA polymerase II.

Mavankal G(1), Ignatius Ou SH, Oliver H, Sigman D, Gaynor RB.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Molecular Virology, University of Texas Southwestern Medical
Center, Dallas 75235-8594, USA.

The Tat-responsive region (TAR) element is a critical RNA regulatory element in
the human immunodeficiency virus (HIV) long terminal repeat, which is required
for activation of gene expression by the transactivator protein Tat. Recently, we
demonstrated by gel-retardation analysis that RNA polymerase II binds to TAR RNA 
and that Tat prevents this binding even when Tat does not bind to TAR RNA. These 
results suggested that direct interactions between Tat and RNA polymerase II may 
prevent RNA polymerase II pausing and lead to Tat-mediated increases in
transcriptional elongation. To test this possibility, we performed protein
interaction studies with RNA polymerase II and both the HIV-1 and the closely
related HIV-2 Tat protein. These studies indicated that both the HIV-1 and HIV-2 
Tat proteins could specifically interact with RNA polymerase II. Mutagenesis of
both HIV-1 and HIV-2 Tat demonstrated that the basic domains of both the HIV-1
and HIV-2 Tat proteins were required for this interaction. Furthermore, "far
Western" analysis suggested that the largest subunit of RNA polymerase II was the
site for interaction with Tat. The interactions between Tat and RNA polymerase II
were of similar magnitude to those detected between RNA polymerase II and the
cellular transcription factor RAP30, which stably associates with RNA polymerase 
II during transcriptional elongation. These studies are consistent with the model
that RNA polymerase II is a cellular target for Tat resulting in Tat-mediated
increases in transcriptional elongation from the HIV long terminal repeat.

DOI: 10.1073/pnas.93.5.2089 
PMCID: PMC39914
PMID: 8700889  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

