
1. Nat Med. 1999 Jan;5(1):78-82.

AlphaVbeta5 integrin: a co-receptor for adeno-associated virus type 2 infection.

Summerford C(1), Bartlett JS, Samulski RJ.

Author information: 
(1)Gene Therapy Center, Department of Pharmacology, University of North Carolina 
at Chapel Hill, 27599, USA.

Comment in
    Nat Med. 1999 May;5(5):467-8.

Understanding the primary steps of viral entry can have important implications
for strategies to prevent infection of known viral pathogens as well as
determining parameters for efficient gene delivery using viral vectors. Recently,
a two-step process for viral infection involving attachment of virus to a primary
receptor (coxsackievirus adenovirus receptor and heparan sulfate proteoglycan)
and subsequent mediation of virus entry by a co-receptor (alphaV integrins and
HVEM) has been determined for both adenovirus and HSV, respectively. Heparan
sulfate proteoglycan serves as a primary attachment receptor for adeno-associated
virus type 2 (AAV-2)(ref. 5). Here we determined that alphaVbeta5 integrin plays 
a part in efficient AAV infection. Experiments using the chelating agent EDTA to 
disrupt integrin function resulted in a corresponding decrease in AAV infection, 
consistent with the possibility that integrin mediates infection. Viral overlay
experiments on purified plasma membrane proteins as well as immunoprecipitated
integrin beta5 subunit demonstrated that AAV directly associates with the beta5
subunit of alphaVbeta5 integrin. Genetically defined cells expressing alphaVbeta5
integrin showed increased susceptibility to AAV infection, demonstrating a
biological role of this integrin in AAV infection. Finally, viral binding and
internalization studies indicate that alphaVbeta5 integrin is not a primary
attachment receptor for AAV-2, but is instead involved in facilitating virus
internalization. This study supports the idea that alphaVbeta5 integrin serves as
a co-receptor for AAV-2 virions, and should have a substantial effect on the use 
of AAV vectors in human gene therapy.

DOI: 10.1038/4768 
PMID: 9883843  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

